Marc Sabatella's Jazz Improvisation Primer: Chord/Scale Relationships

Chord/Scale Relationships

Most improvisation in mainstream jazz is based on chord progressions.  The
chord progression is the sequence of chords that harmonizes the melody.
Usually each chord lasts a measure; sometimes two, sometimes only half.  A
fakebook will give the symbol representing a particular chord above the
corresponding point in the melody.

Even more important than the actual chords, however, are the scales implied
by those chords.  An improviser, when playing over a D minor chord, whose
symbol is Dm, will normally play lines built from notes in the D dorian
scale.  This section documents the various chords and associated scales
used in jazz.  Familiarity with note names and locations is assumed.

If your aim is to become a jazz performer, you should practice improvising
lines based on all the scales presented here, and in all twelve keys.
Otherwise, you may stick to just one key per scale, but you should still
practice improvising over each chord/scale relationship in order to better
recognize their sounds.

	Basic Theory

This section reviews the concepts of intervals, scales, keys, and chords from 
classical theory. Those readers with basic classical theory training should be 
able to skip this section if they wish.

		Intervals

There are twelve different notes in traditional music: C, C#/Db, D, D#/Eb, E, F, 
F#/Gb, G, G#/Ab, A, A#/Bb, and B. After the B comes the C an octave higher than 
the first C, and this cycle continues. This sequence is called the chromatic scale. 
Each step in this scale is called a half step or semitone. The interval between two 
notes is defined by the number of half steps between them. Two notes a half step 
apart, like C and C#, define a minor second. Notes that are two half steps apart, 
like C and D, define a major second. This is also called a whole step. Expanding by 
half steps, the remaining intervals are the minor third, major third, perfect fourth, 
tritone, perfect fifth, minor sixth, major sixth, minor seventh, major seventh, and 
finally, the octave.

Most of these intervals have other names, as well. For example, a tritone is sometimes 
called an augmented fourth if the spelling of the notes in the interval appears to 
describe a fourth. For example, the tritone interval from C to F# is called an augmented
fourth, because the interval from C to F is a perfect fourth. Conversely, if the spelling 
of the notes in the interval appears to describe a fifth, then the tritone is sometimes 
called a diminished fifth. For example, the tritone interval from C to Gb, which is
actually the same as the interval from C to F#, is called a diminished fifth, because 
the interval from C to G is a perfect fifth. In general, if any major, minor, or perfect 
interval is expanded by a half step by changing an accidental (the flat or sharp 
indication on the note) the resultant interval is called augmented, and if it is 
reduced by a half step by changing an accidental, the resultant interval is called diminished.

Major And Minor Scales

All scales are simply subsets of the chromatic scale. Most scales have 7 different 
notes, although some have 5, 6, or 8. The simplest scale, which will be used as an 
example for the discussion of chords, is the C major scale, which is "C, D, E, F, G, A,
B". A major scale is defined by the intervals between these notes: "W W H W W W (H)", 
where "W" indicates a whole step and "H" a half. Thus, a G major scale is "G, A, B, 
C, D, E, F#", with a half step leading to the G that would start the next octave.
The scale consisting of the same notes as the C major scale, but starting on A ("A, 
B, C, D, E, F, G") is the A minor scale. This is called the relative minor of C major, 
since it is a minor scale built from the same notes. The relative minor of any major scale
is formed by playing the same notes starting on the sixth note of the major scale. 
Thus, the relative minor of G major is E minor. A piece that is based on a particular 
scale is said to be in the key of that scale. For instance, a piece based on the notes C, D,
E, F, G, A, and B is said to be in the key of either C major or A minor. The chord 
progression of the piece may distinguish between the two. Similarly, a piece based on 
the notes G, A, B, C, D, E, and F# is either in G major or E minor. If the word
"major" or "minor" is omitted, "major" is assumed. The collection of flat and sharp 
notes in a scale defines the key signature of the associated key. Thus, the key 
signature of G major is F#.
You should try playing various major and minor scales. You may wish to write out the 
notes for each, or buy a book like Dan Haerle's Scales For Jazz Improvisation, which 
contains many scales already written out for you. The more complex scales
described below should be written out and practiced as well. Listeners should try 
enough of each scale to become familiar with the sound. In many cases, just one key 
will suffice. Performers should practice each scale in all twelve keys over the entire
range of their instruments until they have complete mastery over all of them. 
However, do not become so bogged down in the various scales that you become frustrated 
and never advance to the next sections on applying the theory. You should start on
the applications once you have some command of the dorian, mixolydian, lydian, and 
locrian modes discussed below.

Chords

A chord is a set of notes, usually played at the same time, that form a particular 
harmonic relationship with each other. The most basic chord is the triad. A triad, 
as the name implies, is composed of three notes, separated by intervals of a third. For
instance, the notes C, E, and G played together comprise a C major triad. It is so 
called because the three notes come from the beginning of the C major scale. The 
interval from C to E is a major third, and from E to G a minor third. These intervals define
a major triad. A G major triad is composed of G, B, and D; other major triads are 
constructed similarly. The notes A, C, and E comprise an A minor triad, so called 
because the notes come from the beginning of the A minor scale. The interval from 
A to C is a minor third, and from C to E a major third. These intervals define a 
minor triad. An E minor triad is composed of E, G, and B; other minor triads are 
constructed similarly.
The two other types of triads are the diminished triad and the augmented triad. 
A diminished triad is like a minor triad, but the major third on top is reduced to 
a minor third. Thus, an A diminished triad would be formed by changing the E in an A minor
triad to an Eb. An augmented triad is like a major triad, but the minor third on 
top is increased to a major triad. Thus, a C augmented triad would be formed by 
changing the G in a C major triad to a G#. Note that a diminished triad can be formed
from three notes of the major scale; for example, B, D, and F from C major. 
However, there are no naturally occurring augmented triads in the major or minor scales.
A triad can be extended by adding more thirds on top. For instance, if you take the C 
major triad ("C E G"), and add B, you have a major seventh chord (Cmaj7 or CM7), so 
called because the notes come from the C major scale. Similarly, if you take
an A minor triad ("A C E"), and add G, you have a minor seventh chord (Am7 or A-7), 
so called because the notes come from the A minor scale. The most common type of 
seventh chord in classical harmony, however, is the dominant seventh,
which is obtained by adding a minor seventh to the major triad built on the fifth 
note of the major scale, also called the dominant. For instance, in the key of C 
major, the fifth note is G, so a G major triad (G B D) with a seventh added (F) is a
dominant seventh chord (G7).
These three types of seventh chords have a very important relationship to each 
other. In any major key, for example, C, the chord built on the second step of the 
scale is a minor seventh chord; the chord built on the fifth step of the scale is a 
dominant seventh chord; and the seventh chord built on the root of the scale, also 
called the tonic, is a major seventh chord. Roman numerals are often used to indicate 
scale degrees, with capital letters indicating major triads and their sevenths, and 
lower case letters indicating minor triads and their sevenths. The sequence 
Dm7 - G7 - Cmaj7 in the key of C can thus be represented as ii-V-I. This is a very 
common chord progression in jazz, and is discussed in much detail later. The motion 
of roots in this progression is upwards by perfect fourth, or, equivalently, downward 
by perfect fifth. This is one of the strongest resolutions in classical harmony as well.
Sevenths can also be added to diminished triads or augmented triads. In the case 
of a diminished triad, the third added can either be a minor third, which creates 
a fully diminished seventh (for example, A C Eb Gb, or Adim) or a major third, which
creates a half diminished seventh (for example, B D F A, or Bm7b5). A minor third can 
be added to an augmented triad, although this is a very rarely used chord that does 
not have a standard name in classical theory. Adding a major third to an
augmented triad would create a seventh chord in name only, since added note is a 
duplicate an octave higher of the root (lowest note) of the chord. For example, 
C E G# C. Technically, the seventh is a B# instead of a C, but in modern tuning
systems these are the same note. Two notes that have different names but the same 
pitch, like B# and C or F# and Gb, are called enharmonic. Classical theory is usually 
very picky about the correct enharmonic spelling of a chord, but in jazz, the most
convenient spelling is often used.
More extensions to all types of seventh chords can be created by adding more thirds. 
For instance, the C major seventh chord (C E G B) can be extended into a C major 
ninth by adding D. These further extensions, and alterations formed by raising or
lowering them by a half step, are the trademarks of jazz harmony, and are discussed 
in sections below. While there is an almost infinite variety of possible chords, most 
chords commonly used in jazz can be classified as either major chords, minor chords,
dominant chords, or half diminished chords. Fully diminished chords and augmented 
chords are used as well, but as will be seen, they are often used as substitutes for 
one of these four basic types of chords.

The Circle Of Fifths

The interval of a perfect fifth is significant in many ways in music theory. Many 
people use a device called the circle of fifths to illustrate this significance. 
Picture a circle in which the circumference has been divided into twelve equal 
parts, much like the face of a clock. Put the letter C at the top of the circle, 
and then label the other points clockwise G, D, A, E, B, F#/Gb, C#/Db, G#/Ab, D#/Eb, 
A#/Bb, and F. The interval between any two adjacent notes is a perfect fifth. Note 
that each note of the chromatic scale is included exactly once in the circle.

One application of the circle of fifths is in determining key signatures. The key 
of C major has no sharps or flats. As you move clockwise around the circle, each new 
key signature adds one sharp. For example, G major has one sharp (F#); D major has
two (F# and C#); A major has three (F#, C#, and G#); E major has four (F#, C#, G#, 
and D#); and so forth. Also note that the sharps added at each step themselves trace 
the circle of fifths, starting with F# (added in G major), then C# (in D), then G#
(in A), then D# (in E), and so forth. Conversely, if you trace the circle 
counterclockwise, the key signatures add flats. For example, F major has one flat 
(Bb); Bb major has two (Bb and Eb); Eb major has three (Bb, Eb, and Ab); and so forth. The
flats added at each step also trace the circle of fifths, starting with Bb (added in 
F major), then Eb (in Bb), then Ab (in Eb), and so forth.
The circle of fifths can also define scales. Any set of seven consecutive notes can 
be arranged to form a major scale. Any set of five consecutive notes can be arranged 
to form a pentatonic scale, which is discussed later. If the labels on the circle of 
fifths are considered as chord names, they show root movement downward by perfect 
fifth when read counter-clockwise. This root movement has already been observed to 
be one of the strongest resolutions there is, especially in the context of 
a ii-V-I chord progression. For example, a ii-V-I progression in F is Gm7 - C7 - F, 
and the names of these three chords can be read off the circle of fifths. One can also 
find the note a tritone away from a given note by simply looking diametrically across 
the circle. For example, a tritone away from G is Db, and these are directly across 
from each other. This can be useful in performing tritone substitutions, discussed later.

Major Scale Harmony

Major Scale

The major scale, or ionian mode, should be quite familiar by now. It is associated 
with major seventh chords. In the key of C, for example, the C major seventh chord, 
notated Cmaj7 (or C with a little triangle next to it, or sometimes CM7), is "C E G
B", and these notes outline the C major scale. If a measure in a piece of music is 
harmonized with a Cmaj7 chord, then the C major scale is one appropriate scale to use 
when improvising. The only note in this scale that sounds bad when played against a
Cmaj7 chord is the fourth note, F. You may wish to convince yourself of this by going 
to a piano and playing Cmaj7 in your left hand while playing various notes from the C 
major scale in your right. The fourth of the major is often called an avoid note over
a major seventh chord. This does not mean you are not allowed to ever play F over a 
Cmaj7, of course, but you should be conscious of the dissonant effect it produces.
The chord obtained by adding another third on top ("C E G B D") would be called a Cmaj9, 
and it implies the same scale. Adding another third on top would yield "C, E, G, B, D, F",
and this chord would be called a Cmaj11. Because of the dissonant nature of the F in 
this context, however, neither this chord, nor the Cmaj13 chord obtained by adding an 
additional third (A), are used very much.

Dorian Mode

The dorian mode is built on the second step of the major scale, using the same notes. 
For example, the D dorian scale is built from the notes of the C major scale, starting 
on D, and consists of "D, E, F, G, A, B, C". The dorian mode is a lot like minor
scale, but the sixth step is raised a half step. That is, the D minor scale would 
have a Bb while the dorian has a B. Because it is so similar to the minor scale, it 
is natural to play this scale over a minor seventh chord. In fact, it is used more 
often than the minor scale itself. If you go to a piano and play a Dm7 chord 
("D F A C") in your left hand, and play notes from the D dorian and D minor scales in 
your right, you will probably find that the dorian mode sounds better, because the B 
is less dissonant against the Dm7 than the Bb is. If you use the dorian mode over a 
minor seventh chord, there are no notes to avoid. Like the major seventh chord, you 
can add more thirds to the minor seventh chord to obtain Dm9, Dm11, and Dm13. These
chords still imply the same dorian mode. If you use the natural minor scale, the 
thirteen chord contains the note Bb, which is somewhat dissonant in this context. 
This chord is seldom used, but when it is called for, it is often notated Dm7b6, 
and is one of the few exceptions to the rule that most chords are written in terms 
of odd numbered extensions above the seventh. This rule comes from the fact that 
chords are traditionally built by stacking thirds. The notation Dm6 is sometimes 
as a synonym for Dm13 when the B natural is explicitly meant.

Phrygian Mode

The third mode of the major scale is called the phrygian mode. In the key of C, a 
phrygian scale is built on E, and consists of "E, F, G, A, B, C, D". This scale, 
like the dorian mode, is also similar to the minor scale, except that the second 
step in the phrygian mode is lowered by a half step. That is, an E minor scale 
would have an F# while the phrygian has an F. If you try playing the phrygian scale 
over a minor seventh chord, you will probably find it more dissonant than the minor 
scale, because of the lowered second. The phrygian mode is used occasionally over 
a minor seventh chord, although often the chord is written as m7b9 as a hint to the 
improviser that the phrygian scale is to be used. There are certain other situations 
in which the phrygian scale sounds good. One is over a dominant seventh chord with a 
suspended fourth (see mixolydian mode, below) and a lowered ninth, notated susb9. 
Another is over a particular chord that I will simply call a phrygian chord. A 
phrygian chord in E would be "E F A B D". When the phrygian mode is played over 
this type of chord, the result is a somewhat Spanish sound, particularly if you 
add a G# to the scale, yielding what is sometimes called the Spanish phrygian scale. 
Several Chick Corea tunes, including "La Fiesta", and much of the music from Miles 
Davis' Sketches Of Spain feature this sound extensively.

Lydian Mode

The fourth mode of the major scale is the lydian mode. In the key of C, a lydian scale 
is built on F, and consists of "F, G, A, B, C, D, E". This scale is like the major 
scale except that it contains a raised fourth step. That is, an F major scale would 
contain a Bb while the lydian contains a B. Since the fourth step of the major 
scale is an avoid note over a major seventh chord, this scale gives the improviser 
an alternative. While the raised fourth might sound a little unusual at first, you 
should find that it is in general preferable to the natural fourth of the major scale. 
When the symbol Cmaj7 appears, you have a choice between the major and lydian 
scales. Often, if the lydian mode is specifically intended, the symbol Cmaj7#11 
will appear instead. Recall that Cmaj11 contains an F as the eleventh; Cmaj7#11 
denotes that this note should be raised by a half step. 

Mixolydian Mode

The fifth mode of the major scale is the mixolydian mode. In the key of C, a mixolydian 
scale is built on G, and consists of "G, A, B, C, D, E, F". This scale is like the major 
scale except that the seventh step is lowered a half step. That is, a G major scale
would contain an F# while the mixolydian contains an F. Since the seventh chord built 
on the fifth degree of the major scale is a dominant seventh, it is natural to play 
lines based on the mixolydian mode over a dominant seventh chord. For instance, the G
mixolydian scale might be used over a G7 chord.
As with the major scale over a major seventh chord, the fourth step of the scale (C 
in the case of G mixolydian) is somewhat of an avoid note over a dominant seventh 
chord. However, there is a chord called a suspended chord, notated Gsus, Gsus4,
G7sus, G7sus4, F/G, Dm7/G, or G11 over which there are no avoid notes in the G 
mixolydian mode. The notation F/G indicates an F major triad over the single note G 
in the bass. The term "suspension" comes from classical harmony and refers to
the temporary delaying of the third in a dominant chord by first playing the fourth 
before resolving it to the third. In jazz, however, the fourth often is never resolved. 
The suspended chord consists of the root, fourth, fifth, and usually the seventh as
well. Herbie Hancock's tune "Maiden Voyage" consists solely of unresolved suspended 
chords.

Minor Scale

The aeolian mode, or minor scale, has already been discussed. It can be played over a 
minor seventh chord, although the dorian or phrygian modes are used more often. It is 
most often played over a m7b6 chord.

Locrian Mode

The seventh and final mode of the major scale is the locrian mode. In the key of C, a 
locrian scale is built on B, and consists of "B, C, D, E, F, G, A". The seventh chord 
built on this scale ("B D F A") is a half diminished seventh chord, Bm7b5. This
symbol comes from the fact that this chord is similar to a Bm7, except that the fifth 
is lowered by a half step. The classical symbol for this chord is a circle with 
a "/" through it. The locrian scale can be used over a half diminished (also called 
a minor seven flat five) chord, but the second step is somewhat dissonant and is 
sometimes considered an avoid note.

Melodic Minor Harmony

In classical theory, there are three types of minor scale. The minor scale we have 
already discussed, the aeolian mode, is also called the natural minor or pure minor. 
The two other minor scales were derived from it to provide more interesting harmonic
and melodic possibilities. If you construct a ii-V-I progression in a minor key, you 
will find that the seventh chord built on the root is a minor seventh chord, and the 
seventh chord built on the second step is a half diminished seventh chord. For example,
Am7 and Bm7b5 in the key of A minor. The chord built on the fifth step of this scale 
is a minor chord, for example Em7 in A minor. The resolution of Em7 to Am7 is not as 
strong as E7 to Am7. Also, the Am7 does not sound like a tonic; it sounds like
it should resolve to a D chord. By raising the seventh degree of the minor scale by 
a half step (that is, raising the G of A minor to G#), these problems are solved. 
The chord built on the fifth is now E7, and the seventh chord built on the root is 
an A minor triad with a major seventh, often notated Am-maj7. This creates a much 
stronger ii-V-i. The resultant scale, "A, B, C, D, E, F, G#", is called the harmonic 
minor, since it is perceived to yield more interesting harmonies than the natural minor.
The seventh degree of a major scale is sometimes called the leading tone, since it is 
only a half step below the tonic and leads very well into it melodically. The seventh 
degree of the natural minor scale, on the other hand, is a whole step below the tonic
and does not lead nearly as well into it. Although the harmonic minor scale contains 
a leading tone, if you play that scale, you may note that the interval between the 
sixth and seventh steps (the F and G# in A harmonic minor) is awkward melodically.
This interval is called an augmented second. Although it sounds just like a minor 
third, there are no scale tones between the two notes. This interval was considered 
to be dissonant in classical harmony, In order to rectify this situation, the sixth 
can be raised a half step as well (from F to F#) to yield the melodic minor. In 
classical theory, this scale is often used ascending only. When descending, since 
the G# is not used to lead into the tonic A, the natural minor is often used instead. 
Jazz harmony does not normally distinguish these cases, however. The melodic minor 
scale "A, B, C, D, E, F#, G#" is used both when ascending and descending.
Both the harmonic and melodic minors outline a m-maj7 i chord, for example Am-maj7 
("A C E G#") in A minor. Either of the harmonic or melodic minor scales can be used 
on this chord. The melodic minor is also used on chords marked simply m6, although, 
as was noted earlier, this symbol can also imply the dorian mode. Several of the 
modes of the melodic minor scale yield particularly interesting harmonies and are 
commonly played in jazz. These scales are not commonly described in classical
theory, so their names are less standardized than the modes of the major scale.

Phrygian #6
There is no common term for the second mode of the melodic minor scale. The second mode 
of A melodic minor is "B, C, D, E, F#, G#, A". This scale is similar to the phrygian mode 
xcept that it has a raised sixth. For this reason it can be called phrygian #6, although 
that name is not by any means standard. It is most often used as a substitute for the 
phrygian mode.

Lydian Augmented
The third mode of the melodic minor scale is known as the lydian augmented scale. In A 
melodic minor, a lydian augmented scale is built on C and consists of "C, D, E, F#, G#, 
A, B". This scale contains an augmented major seventh chord "C E G# B".
There is no standard symbol for this chord, but Cmaj7#5 is used occasionally, as is 
Cmaj7-aug or Cmaj7+. When this chord is called for, the lydian augmented scale is an 
appropriate choice. The maj7#5 chord is mostly used as a substitute for an ordinary
major seventh.

Lydian Dominant
The fourth mode of the melodic minor scale is often called the lydian dominant or the 
lydian b7. If you construct it, you should see why. In A melodic minor, a lydian dominant 
scale is built on D and consists of "D, E, F#, G#, A, B, C". This scale
resembles the D major scale "D, E, F#, G, A, B, C#" but with two alterations: the raised 
fourth characteristic of the lydian mode, and the lowered seventh characteristic of the 
mixolydian mode. The mixolydian mode was described as a possible scale choice to use over
a dominant seventh chord, but the fourth step was an avoid note. The lydian dominant 
scale does not contain this avoid note. As with the lydian scale and the raised fourth 
over a major seventh chord, the lydian dominant may sound unusual at first, but it is 
generally more interesting than the mixolydian when played over a dominant seventh.
This particular sound, the raised fourth over a dominant seventh chord, was widely 
used in the bebop era, and earned the early bebop musicians a lot of criticism for 
their use of such non-traditional sounds. This sound was also the genesis of the
Thelonious Monk composition "Raise Four", which prominently features the raised fourth 
in the melody. The use of this scale is often explicitly indicated by the symbol D7#11. 
Bebop musicians often called this a flatted fifth, writing the chord symbol as
D7b5, although this normally implies the diminished scale, which is discussed later.

Fifth Mode
The fifth mode of the melodic minor scale has no common name, and is normally used only 
over the V chord in a minor key ii-V-i progression. This usage will be discussed later.

Locrian #2
The sixth mode of the melodic minor is often called locrian #2, since it is actually 
the locrian mode with a raised second step. For example, the F# locrian mode is based 
on G major and consists of "F#, G, A, B, C, D, E", but the F# locrian #2 scale is
based on A melodic minor and consists of "F#, G#, A, B, C, D, E". Since the second 
step of the locrian mode is an avoid note over a m7b5 chord, the locrian #2 scale is 
often used instead. This scale is also sometimes called the half diminished scale.

Altered Scale
The seventh mode of the melodic minor scale is often called the diminished whole tone 
scale, because it combines elements of the diminished and whole tone scales discussed 
later. Another name for this scale is the altered scale. To see why, recall the
introductory discussion on chords. Chords are constructed by stacking thirds. Triads 
consisting of three notes were discussed, as were seventh chords consisting of four 
notes. In the key of C, G7 is the dominant seventh chord. It contains a root (G), a
third (B), a fifth (D), and a seventh (F). If we add another third on top, A, we have 
a ninth chord G9. If we add another third, C, we have an eleventh chord G11. The C is 
the fourth of the scale, and is normally an avoid note. This symbol is normally
used only when the fourth is explicitly required, as in a suspended chord. If we 
then add another third, E, we have a thirteenth chord G13. The C is normally omitted 
from this chord. Another third would bring us back to G. This chord can be altered by 
raising or lowering individual notes by a half step. The root, third, and seventh are 
not normally altered, since they are in large part what define the chord. A change to 
any of these destroys the dominant feel of the chord. The raised eleventh has already 
been discussed. The other interesting alterations are to the fifth and the ninth. For 
a G7 chord, this means the lowered or flat fifth (Db), the raised or sharp fifth (D#), 
the lowered or flat ninth (Ab), and the raised or sharp ninth (A#).
So now let us return to the so-called altered scale. A G altered scale can be built 
from Ab melodic minor, and consists of "G, Ab, Bb/A#, Cb/B, Db, Eb/D#, F". First note 
that this scale contains G, B, and F, the root, third, and seventh of the G7 chord.
The rest of the notes, Ab, Bb, Db, and Eb, are respectively, the flatted ninth, the 
raised ninth, the flatted fifth, and the raised fifth. In other words, all the possible 
alterations in a ninth chord are included in this scale. The chord implied by this scale is
often notated simply G7alt, although G7#9#5 is used as well, as is G7#9. The b9 and b5 
symbols are not normally used in this context, despite being present in the scale, 
because they imply the diminished scale which is discussed later. The sound of the 
altered scale and the chord it implies is much more complex than any other dominant 
seventh chord/scale so far presented, and it is one of the most important sounds in 
post bop jazz. You may wish to spend more time on this scale to get used to it. Try 
going to a piano and playing the root, third, and seventh in your left hand while 
playing the altered scale, and lines based on it, in your right. You may use this 
scale even when the chord appears to be an ordinary dominant seventh, but you should 
do so cautiously in a group setting, because other members of the group may be playing 
mixolydian or lydian dominant sounds, and your altered scale will sound dissonant against 
them. This is not necessarily wrong, but you should be conscious of the effect produced.

Symmetric Scales

When a mode of given scale produces the same type of scale as the original, the scale 
is said to be symmetric. Several of the important scales used by jazz musicians are 
symmetric. For instance, the chromatic scale is symmetric, in that every single
mode of it is another chromatic scale. In this case, there is really only one unique 
chromatic scale; all others are just modes of it. In general, if N modes of a given 
scale produce the same type of scale (including the first mode, the original scale 
itself), then there are only 12/N different scales of that type.
One thing to watch out for in the scales discussed in this section is that they seem 
to lend themselves to playing patterns, and sometimes it is difficult to avoid sounding 
cliched when using these scales. When you have several measures of a given chord, a
common technique is to play a short figure in the associated scale and repeat it 
transposed to several different positions. For instance, a possible pattern in C major 
would be "C, D, E, G". This pattern could be repeated several times starting at different
positions, perhaps as "D, E, F, A" or "E, F, G, B". For some reason, many of the scales 
listed below invite this type of approach, and it is easy to end up with with a few 
cliches you use every time you are confronted with these scales. Always be conscious of 
this. You should not feel that a scale is dictating to you what you can or should play.

Whole Tone Scale
A particularly easy scale is the whole tone scale, so called because all the steps in 
the scale are whole steps. A C whole tone scale consists of "C, D, E, F#, G#, Bb". It 
has only six notes, and all six of its modes (including itself) form whole tone scales.
There are thus only 12/6 or 2 different whole tone scales. The other one is "Db, Eb, 
F, G, A, B". Since the first, third, and fifth degrees of this scale form an augmented 
triad, this scale can be be played over augmented chords. This scale also contains the 
note that would be the seventh in a dominant chord (that is, Bb in a C7). The chord 
implied by this scale is written either as C7aug, Caug, C7+, C+, or C7#5.

The Diminished Scales
Another symmetric scale is the diminished scale. This scale is also called the whole 
step half step scale, or the half step whole step scale, because it is constructed 
from alternating half and whole steps. A whole step half step (abbreviated WH) scale on C
consists of "C, D, D#, F, F#, G#, A, B"; a half step whole step (abbreviated HW) scale 
consists of "C, Db, Eb, E, F#, G, A, Bb". These scales each contain eight notes. Note 
that, in addition to the original scale, the third, fifth, and seventh modes of
either a WH or HW scale (in addition to the first mode) form another WH or HW scale, 
so there are only 12/4 or 3 different diminished scales of each type. Also, note that 
the WH diminished scale is just the second mode of the HW diminished scale,
so that in fact, there are only three distinct diminished scales in all. The WH and 
HW versions of this scale are used in different situations, however.
The HW diminished scale outlines a dominant seventh chord with a lowered ninth and fifth. For example, C7b9b5 is "C E Gb
Bb Db" and these notes, as well as the sixth, the natural fifth and the raised ninth, are all present in the C HW diminished scale.
The HW scale is thus a good choice to use over dominant seventh b9b5 chords. John Coltrane used this sound a lot.
This scale is very similar to the altered scale, which you may recall is also called the diminished whole tone scale. The C altered
scale contains the first five notes of the C HW diminished scale and the last four (overlapping the E and F#) of the C whole
tone scale. Since both scales contain lowered fifths and lowered and raised ninths, they are sometimes used interchangeably
over dominant seventh chords. Try going to a piano and practicing both scales in your right hand over the root, third, and
seventh in your left. They sound very similar. Many fakebooks are inconsistent in using the symbols alt, #9, b9, b5, #9#5, and
b9b5. The lesson here is, you will have to depend on your ears and common sense to guide you in the use of these two scales.
The WH diminished scale outlines a fully diminished seventh chord and is thus used over diminished chords. For instance, the C
WH diminished scale "C, D, D#, F, F#, G#, A, B" can be played over Cdim or Cdim7. The classical symbol for diminished, a
small circle, is sometimes used as well. Note that this scale is the same as the D#, F#, and A WH diminished scales, and in fact
Cdim7, D#dim7, F#dim7, and Adim7 are all inversions of the same chord. They may be used interchangeably.
More importantly, this scale is also the same the D, F, G#, and B HW diminished scales. These scales are associated with their
respective b9b5 dominant chords. The C, Eb, F#, and A diminished chords are thus often used as chord substitutions for the
associated dominant chords, and vice versa. In most places where you see a diminished chord, you can substitute one of the
related dominant chords. One particularly common chord progression is | Cmaj7 | C#dim | Dm7 |. The C#dim chord here
implies the C# WH diminished scale, which is the same as the C, Eb, F#, and A HW diminished scale. In this case, the
A7b9b5 chord can be substituted for the C#dim chord. Not only do A7b9b5 and C#dim share the same scale, but the A
dominant chord also resolves well to the D minor chord. Any of the scales associated with A dominant chords, such as A
mixolydian, A lydian dominant, A altered, or A blues, can thus be played over the C#dim chord in this context.

Pentatonic Scales

There are a group of five note scales known collectively as pentatonic scales. Intervals in a traditional pentatonic scale are
normally limited to whole steps and minor thirds. Many performers use these relatively simple scales to good effect, including
McCoy Tyner and Woody Shaw. The two basic pentatonic scales are the major pentatonic scale and the minor pentatonic
scale. A C major pentatonic scale is "C, D, E, G, A", and a C minor pentatonic scale "C, Eb, F, G, Bb". Note that the C minor
pentatonic scale is actually the fifth mode of an Eb major pentatonic scale. Other modes of the pentatonic scales are used as
well, such as "C, D, F, G, Bb", which is the second mode of the Bb major pentatonic scale. This scale can be called the
suspended pentatonic scale, although this usage is by no means standard.
As their names imply, the major, minor, and suspended pentatonic scales can be used over major, minor, and suspended
chords respectively. For instance, the C major pentatonic scale can be used over Cmaj7. Sometimes this chord is written C6
to imply more strongly that the major pentatonic scale is to be used. The C minor pentatonic scale can be used over Cm7. The
C suspended pentatonic chord can be used over a C7sus chord.
Other five note scales are used occasionally as well. For instance, the scale "E, F, A, B, D" is the traditional Japanese "in sen
scale". It can be used as a substitute for the E phrygian mode (note it in fact defines the E phrygian chord) to impart an Asian
flavor to the music. Useful variations of this scale include the second mode, "F, A, B, D, E", which can be used over a
Fmaj7#11 chord; the fourth mode, "B, D, E, F, A", which can be used over a Bm7b5 chord; and the fifth mode, "D, E, F, A,
B", which can be used over a Dm6 chord.
Since there are relatively few notes in a pentatonic scale, one pentatonic scale can often be used over several different chords
with no real avoid notes. For instance, the C major pentatonic scale "C, D, E, G, A" could be used over Cmaj7, C7, D7sus,
Dm7, Em7b6, Fmaj7, G7sus, Gm7, or Am7.

Derived Scales

The Blues Scale
The blues scale is often the first scale, after the major scale, taught to beginning improvisers, and is in some cases the only other
scale they ever learn. This scale supposedly has its roots in African American music dating back to the days of slavery, but the
exact origins of its modern incarnation are unknown. The C blues scale consists of "C, Eb, F, F#, G, Bb". The second degree
of this scale, which is the flatted third of the minor scale, is called a blue note. In vocal music, it is often sung somewhere
between an Eb and an E. In instrumental music, various techniques are employed to achieve the same effect, such as stretching
the string while playing an Eb on a stringed instrument, lipping down an E on a wind instrument, or striking both the Eb and E
simultaneously on a keyboard instrument. The flatted seventh and fifth are also sometimes called blue notes, and are not always
sung or played exactly on the notated pitch. Variations on the blues scale that include the natural third, fifth, or seventh can be
used as well. Also, note that if the flatted fifth is omitted, the resultant scale is the minor pentatonic scale. The minor pentatonic
scale can thus be used as a substitute for the blues scale, and vice versa.
The beauty of the blues scale is that it can be played over an entire blues progression with no real avoid notes. If you try
playing lines based on this usage, for instance, a C blues scale over a C7 chord, you get instant positive feedback, since almost
everything you can do sounds good. This unfortunately leads many players to overuse the scale, and to run out of interesting
ideas quickly. There are only so many phrases (licks) that can be played over a six note scale, and most of them have already
been played thousands of times by now. This is not to say you should never use the blues scale; on the contrary, it is vitally
important to jazz. But do not become so enamored of the easy gratification it can yield that you practice blues licks over and
over rather than expand your harmonic vocabulary.
The language metaphor is a good one. It is hard to say interesting things with a limited vocabulary. Often players like Count
Basie are offered as examples of musicians who manage to make a lot out of a little, but there is a difference between saying
few words because you are choosing them carefully, and saying few words because you have nothing to say or because your
vocabulary is too limited to express your thoughts. This advice transcends the blues scale, of course.
It is not always necessary to vary the harmonic content of your playing if you are sufficiently creative with other aspects. One
way to introduce added interest when using the blues scale is to use any special effects at your disposal to vary your sound.
This can include honking and screaming for saxophonists, growling for brass players, or using clusters on the piano.
Minor Scales
The harmonic minor scale is sometimes played over m-maj7 chords. Its modes have no common names, and they are rarely
used by jazz musicians except as bridges over a ii-V-i chord progression. For example, consider the chord progression |
Bm7b5 | E7alt | Am-maj7 |. An A harmonic minor scale can be played over all three of these chords, instead of the traditional
B locrian, E altered, and A melodic minor scales. Another way of saying this is that the second mode can be played over a
m7b5 chord, and that the fifth mode can be used over an altered dominant chord. Even when you are not using the harmonic
minor scale over an entire progression, you may wish to use its fifth mode over the V chord in a minor key ii-V-i progression.
The advantage of using this scale in this example is that it differs from the B locrian and A melodic minor scales by only one
note each. The disadvantage is that the root of the scale is an avoid note in this context.
The melodic minor can be used in this same way; its fifth mode can be used over the V chord in a ii-V-i progression to keep
some commonality between the scales used. Note however that the second mode of the A melodic minor is not an ideal choice
over the Bm7b5 chord, because this scale has F# instead of F. This is the only difference between the harmonic and melodic
minor scales. Your choice of whether to use the fifth mode of the harmonic or melodic minor scales over a dominant seventh
chord may partially depend on the key of the tune. If F# is in the key signature, then the melodic minor may sound more
diatonic. You may choose that scale if this is the sound you are trying to achieve, or the harmonic minor if you are trying to
avoid sounding diatonic. Conversely, if F# is not in the key signature, then the harmonic minor may sound more diatonic.
Another issue to consider is which of these scales is closer to the scale you are using on the preceding or following chord.
Depending on the sound you are trying to achieve, you may wish to choose the scale that has either more or fewer notes in
common with the surrounding scales.
Bebop Scales
The major bebop scale is a major scale with an added raised fifth or lowered sixth. The C major bebop scale is "C, D, E, F,
G, G#, A, B". This scale can be used over major seventh or major seventh augmented chords. The C major bebop scale can
also be used as a bridge between chords in a progression like | Cmaj7 | Bm7b5 E7 | Am |; that is, the same scale can be
played over the entire progression. Another way of looking at this is to say that we are playing the C major bebop scale itself
over the Cmaj7 chord, playing its eighth mode over the Bm7b5 chord, playing its third mode over the E7 chord, and playing its
seventh mode over the Am chord. These modes closely resembly the major, locrian, altered and minor scales respectively.
Note that we are using the C major bebop scale over a ii-V-i progression in A minor. In general, we can use the major bebop
scale in any given key over a ii-V-i progression in the relative minor to that key.
Other bebop scales include the dominant bebop scale, which is similar to the mixolydian mode but with an additional major
seventh. The C dominant bebop scale is thus "C, D, E, F, G, A, Bb, B". This scale can be used over dominant seventh chords.
The major seventh is not really an avoid note if you use it as a passing tone between the C and Bb. It also serves as the raised
fourth in the Fmaj7 chord that is likely to follow the C7 chord. There is also the minor bebop scale, which is a dorian scale with
an added raised third. The C minor bebop scale is thus "C, D, Eb, E, F, G, A, Bb". This scale can be used over minor seventh
chords, and is often used in minor key blues progressions to give more of a dominant seventh feel to the chords.
Synthetic Scales
The blues and bebop scales are sometimes called synthetic scales, because they do not fit in well with classical theory and
appear to have been invented to fit a particular situation. In general, any number of synthetic scales can be constructed using
just intervals of minor, major, and augmented seconds. You may wish to try experimenting with developing your own scales
and looking for opportunities to use them.


Chord/Scale Chart

The accompanying chart lists the most commonly occurring chords in jazz harmony along with the scales normally associated
with each. The chords are grouped into the four basic categories of major, minor, dominant, and half diminished. In a pinch,
any scale from any chord in any one of these categories can be used for any other chord in that category. There is an additional
category for miscellaneous chords at the end. There are many more possible scales and chords. However, these are the most
important ones in traditional jazz harmony.
        Chord                                 Scale
                       C major, C lydian, C major bebop
 Cmaj7, Cmaj9, C6, C   C major pentatonic, G major pentatonic
 Cmaj7#11              C lydian, B in sen
                       C dorian, C minor bebop, C minor pentatonic
 Cm7, Cm9, Cm11, Cm    F major pentatonic, Bb major pentatonic
                       Eb major bebop, C blues, C minor
                       C dorian, C melodic minor, C minor pentatonic,
 Cm6, Cm               F major pentatonic, Bb major pentatonic,
                       C minor bebop, Eb major bebop, D in sen
 Cm-maj7               C melodic minor, C harmonic minor, Eb major bebop
 Cm7b6                 C minor, Ab major pentatonic
 Cm7b9                 C phrygian, C phrygian #6
                       C mixolydian, C lydian dominant, C dominant bebop,
 C7, C9, C13, C        C blues, C major pentatonic
 C7sus, Csus, C11      C mixolydian
 Bb/C, Gm7/C           C suspended pentatonic, F major pentatonic
 C7#11, C7             C lydian dominant
 C7alt, C7#9#5, C7#9   C altered, F harmonic minor, F melodic minor
 C7b9b5, C7b9          C HW diminished, F harmonic minor, F melodic minor
 C7aug, C7+, C7#5      C whole tone
 Cm7b5                 C locrian #2, C locrian
 Cdim7                 C WH diminished
                       C phrygian, C phrygian #6, C Spanish phrygian
 Cphryg                C in sen
 Cmaj7#5               C lydian augmented, C major bebop
 C7susb9               C phrygian #6, C phrygian