Marc Sabatella's Jazz Improvisation Primer: Applying The Theory To Improvisation

Applying The Theory To Improvisation

The basis of traditional forms of improvisation is to create spontaneously and play 
melodies that are built on the basic chord progression of the song.  At the most 
basic levels, the notes you choose for your improvisation are partially dictated 
by the scale associated with each chord.  This is called playing changes.  More 
advanced forms of improvisation give the performer more melodic and harmonic 
freedom, either by reducing the number of chord changes, or by making the chords
progressions more ambiguous in tonality, to the point of eliminating these structures 
entirely.  These approaches are discussed separately below.

Pianists, guitarists, or other instrumentalists who accompany themselves while 
improvising should read the section on accompanying along with this section and try
to apply both sets of concepts at once when improvising.


Melodic Development

One of your prime concerns should be playing melodically. This does not necessarily 
mean playing prettily, but there should be some sense of continuity to your lines, 
and they should be interesting in themselves. You should also be conscious of the
rhythmic and harmonic development of your improvisations; I include these concepts 
in the term "melodic development". This is hard to teach, and is probably the aspect 
of improvisation that requires the most creativity. Anyone can learn chord/scale
relationships; it is what you do with this knowledge that determines how you sound. 
Hal Crook's book How To Improvise has a lot of information on melodic development, 
especially on rhythmic variation, geared toward the intermediate player, while
George Russell's The Lydian Chromatic Concept Of Tonal Organization For Improvisation 
and David Liebman's A Chromatic Approach To Jazz Harmony And Melody contain advanced 
and very technical discussions on harmonic development.

Pacing

You should be aware of the contour of your solo. A common way to structure a solo is 
based on the model of telling a story. You start simply, build through a series of 
smaller peaks to a climax, and then come to a concluding phrase. This works well in
most situations. However, you may wish to vary from this format occasionally. You can 
decide to start more strongly to introduce your solo, or you may wish to finish right 
at the climax and forego the denouement. You may wish to keep the entire solo at a low 
intensity level to convey a lazy feel, although you probably don't want to bore the 
listeners, either. You may wish to keep the intensity level at a controlled simmer. 
Much like a standup comic working a room, you may want to alter your strategies as 
you assess the mood of the audience. You should strive to be in control of the 
emotional response you generate in your listeners.
There are some common devices that can be used in structuring your solo. One of the 
most important is repetition. After a soloist plays a phrase, he often repeats it, 
or a variation of it. Often the phrase, or a variation of it, is played three times 
before moving on to something else. The variation might be to transpose the phrase, 
or to alter key notes within it to conform to a new chord/scale. The variation might 
consist simply of starting the phrase at a different point in the measure, such as 
on beat three instead of on beat two. The phrase itself may be altered rhythmically, 
either by playing it faster or slower. Related to the idea of repetition is the 
concept of call and response. Rather than repeat the original phrase, you can consider
the phrase as a question or call, and follow it up with an answer or response. This is 
the musical analogue to asking, "did you go to the store today?", and then responding 
"yes, I went to the store today".
On most instruments, you can increase intensity by playing louder, higher, and faster; 
playing softer, lower, and slower usually reduces intensity. Playing simple rhythms 
such as quarter notes and eighth notes where the accents fall on the beats is usually
less intense than playing more complex rhythms such as syncopated rhythms, where most 
accents fall off the beat. A hemiola is a particular type of rhythmic device where 
one meter is superimposed on another. An example of this is the use of quarter note
triplets when playing in 4/4 time.
One long held note can also generate intensity on most instruments, although pianists 
may have to use trills or rollings octaves to achieve this type of sustain. A single 
note or short lick repeated over and over can generate a similar sort of intensity. 
You have to use your judgement in deciding how much is enough.

Phrase Construction

The relationships between chords and scales should not be seen as limiting or determining 
your choice of notes. They are merely an aid, a way to help you relate ideas you may have 
to fingerings on your instrument. Your ideas should not be dictated by the scales, 
however. Note that very few jazz singers use scales extensively; they generally are 
able to translate an idea more directly into their voices. For this reason, 
instrumentalists should practice improvisation by singing, in addition to practicing 
their instruments. No matter how untrained your voice may be, it is more natural to 
you than your instrument, so you may find you are able to develop ideas better by 
singing them than by attempting to play them. Singers also are usually limited in 
their ability to sing complex harmonic ideas, however, because they do not have 
well-practiced fingerings to fall back on. Scale theory can indeed be a source of 
ideas; just make sure it is not your only source.
Try playing scalar lines that are based mostly on steps, angular lines that are 
based mostly on leaps, as well as lines that combine these approaches. In addition 
to being concerned over your choice of notes, you try to vary the rhythmic content of
your ideas. Beginning improvisers often unwittingly play almost all their phrases 
with just a few underlying rhythms. Try playing lines that are based mostly on half 
notes and quarter notes, lines that are based mostly on eighth notes and triplets, 
as well as lines that combine the two approaches.

Playing Changes

Once you have some idea of the association between chord symbols and scales, and how 
to develop a melodic line, you can start improvising over chord progressions. In 
performance situations, the rhythm section will be outlining the chord progressions
in tempo, while you play improvised lines based on the associated scales. Often the 
chords will change every measure, and you must keep changing scales to keep up. 
However, you should not think one chord at a time. You should be trying to construct
lines that lead from one chord to the next.
The third and seventh of each chord are the notes that most define the sound of the 
chord. If you emphasize these notes in your improvisation, it will help guarantee that 
your lines will accurately imply the changes. Conversely, if you emphasize the other
scale tones, it can add a harmonic richness to the sounds. You are also free to use 
notes not in the scale at all. Bebop players often use a device called the enclosure, 
in which a target note is preceded by notes a half step above and below. This is related
to the idea of a passing tone, except in the enclosure, the chromaticism is used to 
emphasize or delay a particular note rather than to connect two other notes. Other 
non-scale tones can be used as you see fit. While there are many possible chord 
progressions, there are a few basic building blocks that account for many of the chord
changes you will see. If you become familiar with these basics, you will be well on 
your way to being able to play over any set of changes that might come your way. 
Performers should practice the chord progressions described below in all twelve keys to
gain the most fluency. You may wish to try out some specific patterns on these 
progressions, but more importantly, you should simply explore many different ideas 
on each progression in each key so you will be comfortable truly improvising on them,
rather than just playing the licks with which you are comfortable in that key. You 
should experiment with different approaches and learn how to tailor your note choices 
for a given chord type in a given situation for the sound you are trying to achieve.
In addition to reading about these concepts you should try to listen specifically for 
these techniques being applied by other musicians. The most popular jazz musicians of 
the 1950's make a good starting point. These include Miles Davis, Clifford Brown, 
Sonny Rollins, John Coltrane, Cannonball Adderly, Art Pepper, Red Garland, Hank Jones, 
Herb Ellis, Joe Pass, Paul Chambers, and Ray Brown. Any albums from that time period 
featuring one or more of these musicians are recommended for learning about playing changes.

ii-V

The most important chord progression in jazz is the ii-V, which may or may not 
resolve to I. Most tunes will have ii-V progressions in several different keys 
sprinkled throughout. For example, consider the chord progression:
| Cmaj7 | Dm7 G7 | Em7 | A7  | Dm7 | G7  | Cmaj7 |.
There are three ii-V progressions here. Bar two forms a ii-V in the key of C, 
although there is no actual C (I) chord in bar three. Bars three through five 
form a ii-V-I in the key of D minor, and bars five through seven form a ii-V-I 
in C again. There are many devices that can be used when playing over ii-V 
progressions. Some of these are described below.

Major Keys

In a major key, the ii-V-I progression consists of a minor seventh chord, a dominant 
seventh chord, and a major seventh chord. The first scale choices you learned for 
these chords are dorian, mixolydian, and major. In the key of C, the chords are
Dm7 - G7 - Cmaj7, and the associated scales would thus be D dorian, G mixolydian, 
and C major. As you may have noticed, these are all modes of the same C major 
scale. Thus when you see a ii-V progression in a major key, you can play the major
scale of the I chord for the whole progression. This makes it somewhat easier to 
construct lines that lead from one chord to the next, or transcend the individual 
chords. This type of progression, where the scales associated with each of the 
chords are all modes of each other, is called a diatonic progression. While diatonic 
progressions are easy to play over, they can quickly become boring, since you are 
playing the same seven notes for an extended period of time. You can add a little 
variety by using one of the other scales associated with each chord, such as D 
minor, G dominant bebop, C lydian. The most common way to add interest to a ii-V 
progression is to alter the dominant (V) chord. Often the alteration will already
be specified for you, but even when it is not, you generally have the freedom to 
add alterations to dominant chords. It helps if the soloist and the accompanists 
are playing the same alterations, but this is not always practical when improvising 
unless your accompanist has incredible ears and can hear the alterations you are 
making, and in any case it is not actually all that important. In the key of C, 
you might replace the G7 chord with a G7#11, a G7alt, a G7b9b5, or a G7+ chord, 
all of which still fulfill the dominant function in C but imply different scales. 
For instance, if you choose G7#11, the progression then becomes D dorian, G lydian 
dominant, C major.
Another possible alteration to the dominant is called the tritone substitution. 
This means replacing the dominant chord with a dominant seventh chord a tritone 
away. In the key of C, this would mean replacing the G7 with a Db7. This may seem a
strange thing to do, but there are some very good reasons why it works. The third 
and seventh of a chord are the two most important notes in defining the sound and 
function of the chord. If you look at a Db7 chord, you will see it contains Db, F, Ab,
and B, which are respectively the b5, 7, b9, and 3 of a G7 chord. The third and 
seventh of the G7 chord (B and F) become the seventh and third of the Db7 chord. 
Thus, Db7 is very similar to a G7b9b5 chord in sound and function. Furthermore, the
melodic resolution of Db to C in the bass is very strong, functioning almost as a 
passing tone. Once you have made the chord substitution, you can then play any 
scale associated with the Db7 chord, for instance yielding a progression of D 
dorian, Db mixolydian, C major. Using a scale other than mixolydian will yield 
some surprising things. Try a Db lydian dominant scale, which implies a Db7#11 
chord for the substitute dominant. Does this look or sound familiar? It should, 
because the Db lydian dominant and G altered scales are both modes of the same Ab 
melodic minor scale. When you play lines based on Db lydian dominant, you are playing 
lines that are also compatible with G altered. Conversely, Db altered and G lydian 
dominant are both modes of the same D melodic minor scale, and can be used 
interchangeably. Furthermore, the Db and G HW diminished scales are identical, as 
are the respective whole tone scales. These are other reasons the tritone substitution 
works so well.

Minor Keys

ii-V progressions in a minor key generally do not suffer the problem of sounding too 
diatonic. Since the harmonic minor is normally used to generate chord progressions 
in a minor key, a ii-V progression in A minor might consist of | Bm7b5 E7 |
Am-maj7 |. If we try to build a ninth chord from the E7, we see the that the F natural 
in the key of A harmonic minor generates an E7b9 chord. Without any special 
alterations, this progression could imply B locrian, E HW diminished, and A melodic
minor. These scales are sufficiently rich that further alterations are not necessary.
However, most of the same techniques from major keys can be used in a minor key as 
well. We can use the melodic or harmonic minor scales from the i chord, or the major 
bebop scale from its relative major, over the entire progression. We can use a 
different variation of the E7 chord such as E7alt or E7+, or even E7sus; we can 
make a tritone substitution to yield Bb7; and so on. We can also substitute for the 
ii chords, for example using the locrian #2 scale, or replacing the Bm7b5 with an
ordinary Bm7 chord, where the F# comes from the key of A melodic rather than A harmonic 
minor. If we were to make a ninth chord, the C natural in the key of A melodic minor 
generates a Bm7b9 chord, which implies a B phrygian scale. We can even replace the 
ii Bm chord with a II B7 chord, especially a B7alt chord, which contains the D natural 
from the Bm chord. We can also alter the i chord, replacing it with a simple Am7 chord, 
and using any of the various possible scales associated with that chord such as A minor, 
A phrygian, A minor pentatonic, and so on.

Blues

The term "blues" is somewhat overloaded, describing a general style of music and a 
more specific category of chord progressions, as well as its colloquial meaning of 
a particular mood, as in the phrase "I've got the blues". The blues as a style
has a rich history that is beyond the scope of this primer. The basic twelve bar 
blues form was mentioned earlier. In its original form, still played often in rock 
and R&B music, only three chords are used: the I chord, the IV chord, and the V chord. 
The basic blues progression is:
|| I  | I  | I  | I  |         which,       || F  | F  | F  | F  |
 | IV | IV | I  | I  |    in the key of F,   | Bb | Bb | F  | F  |
 | V  | IV | I  | I  ||        yields:       | C  | Bb | F  | F  ||.
The chords are usually all played as dominant seventh chords, although they are not 
actually functioning as dominant chords in that they do not resolve to a tonic. The 
F blues scale can be played over this entire progression. While the blues progression
can be played in any key, the most popular keys among jazz musicians seem to be F, Bb, 
and Eb, whereas rock musicians often prefer E, A, D, or G. This has a lot to do with 
the way instruments are tuned. Popular jazz instruments such as the trumpet and the 
various members of the saxophone family are usually tuned in Bb or Eb, meaning that 
the notated "C" played on these instruments actually sounds like a Bb or Eb 
respectively. Music written for these instruments is therefore transposed.
The fingerings for the instruments favors playing in the key of C, which is actually 
Bb or Eb, depending on the instrument. Guitars tend to dominate rock music, and guitars 
are tuned to favor the keys containing sharps. Playing the blues scale over the basic 
three chord blues progression in a jazz setting gets old very quickly. Starting around 
the swing era, and most notably in the bebop era, musicians began to make additions to 
this simple formula. One common adaptation of the blues progression, which is still 
considered the standard for jazz jam sessions, is:
|| F7   | Bb7  | F7   | F7    |
 | Bb7  | Bb7  | F7   | D7alt |
 | Gm7  | C7   | F7   | C7    |.
This progression offers a wider range of scale possibilities than does the basic three 
chord blues. For example, bars 8 and 9 form a V-i in G minor, and bars 9-11 form 
a ii-V-I in F. The idea of adding ii-V's to the blues progression yields more variations. 
For example, consider:
|| F7     | Bb7    | F7        | Cm7   F7    |
 | Bb7    | Bdim   | F7        | Am7b5 D7alt |
 | Gm7    | C7alt  | F7  D7alt | Gm7   C7alt |.
This particular progression is especially common in bebop and later styles. Note the 
substitution of a Bb ii-V-I in bars 4-5, a G minor ii-V-i in bars 8-9, and a G minor 
V-i in bars 11-12. Also note the diminished chord in bar 6. This diminished chord is
serving as a substitute for the dominant seventh, since both Bdim and Bb7b9 share the 
same Bb HW (B WH) diminished scale.
This same substitution can be made for the second half of bar 2.
Other variations can be made using tritone substitutions. For example, Ab7 can be 
played instead of D7alt in the second half of bar 8. You can also change the qualities 
of the chords, for instance replacing that Ab7 with an Abm7. Another common
substitution is A7alt for the F7 in bar 11. This substitution works because the 
chords share several notes, including the tonic, F, and because the A7alt forms part 
of a G minor II-V-i progression with the D7alt and Gm7 that follow.
Charlie Parker carried these types of substitutions to an extreme in "Blues For 
Alice". The chord progression in that tune is:
|| Fmaj7  | Em7b5 A7b9 | Dm7   G7    | Cm7   F7  |
 | Bb7    | Bbm7  Eb7  | Am7   D7    | Abm7  Db7 |
 | Gm7    | C7         | Fmaj7 D7alt | Gm7   C7  |.
This uses most of the techniques described above. You may wish to play with this 
progression for a while.

Rhythm Changes

The George Gershwin song "I Got Rhythm" is the source for one of the most popular 
chord progressions of the bebop era, second only to the blues progression. This 
form is often called simply rhythm changes. As with the blues progression, there are
many possible variations on rhythm changes. Most tunes based on rhythm changes are 
played in the key of Bb, and are played at very fast tempos, often well over 200 
beats per minute. These songs have a 32 bar AABA form based on the chord
progression:
A || Bbmaj7 G7  | Cm7    F7  | Bbmaj7 G7 | Cm7   F7  |
   | Fm7    Bb7 | Ebmaj7 Ab7 | Dm7    G7 | Cm7   F7  ||
A || Bbmaj7 G7  | Cm7    F7  | Bbmaj7 G7 | Cm7   F7  |
   | Fm7    Bb7 | Ebmaj7 Ab7 | Cm7    F7 | Bbmaj7    ||
B || Am7        | D7         | Dm7       | G7        |
   | Gm7        | C7         | Cm7       | F7        ||
A || Bbmaj7 G7  | Cm7    F7  | Bbmaj7 G7 | Cm7   F7  |
   | Fm7    Bb7 | Ebmaj7 Ab7 | Cm7    F7 | Bbmaj7    ||
This progression contains many ii-V progressions. Any of the standard alterations 
described under ii-V progressions above can be used when playing rhythm changes. 
Many tunes contain slight alterations to this basic progression, especially in the 
last four measures of the A sections. Some of the common alterations are to replace 
the second chord G7 with a diminished chord Bdim, or to replace the fifth chord Bbmaj7 
with Dm7. The former substitution has already been described under the diminished
scale. The latter replaces a I chord with a iii chord, which has three of four notes 
in common, and the respective scales differ by only one note. Furthermore, the Dm7 
and following G7 form a ii-V in C minor, so this is an especially strong substitution
harmonically.
The important characteristics of rhythm changes are the repeated I-VI-ii-V (or 
substitutes) in the first four bars of the A sections, and the basic tonality 
movements by fifths in the bridge, leading back to the original tonic in the 
last A section. If you intend to become an improvising musician, you should become 
fluent in the basic rhythm changes, particularly in the key of Bb, and become 
familiar with the particular variations associated with specific tunes. This 
is also a good opportunity to try out what you have learned about ii-V's, and to 
work on you up tempo playing.

Coltrane Changes

John Coltrane, through original compositions such as "Giant Steps" and "Countdown" 
on the album Giant Steps, and arrangements of standards such as "But Not For Me" on 
the album My Favorite Things, became known for using a particularly complex 
progression that is often called the Coltrane changes, although he was not the 
first or only musician to make use of it.
The primary characteristic of Coltrane changes is tonality movement by major thirds. 
The progression to "Giant Steps" is:
|| Bmaj7  D7  | Gmaj7  Bb7 | Ebmaj7    | Am7   D7   |
 | Gmaj7  Bb7 | Ebmaj7 F#7 | Bmaj7     | Fm7   Bb7  |
 | Ebmaj7     | Am7    D7  | Gmaj7     | C#m7  F#7  | 
 | Bmaj7      | Fm7    Bb7 | Ebmaj7    | C#m7  F#7  ||
The first key center here is B, then G, then Eb, and it continues to cycle through 
these three keys, which are a major third apart.
Coltrane was able to develop this idea in many ways. For example, he used it as a 
substitute for an ordinary ii-V progression.
The progression to "Countdown" is loosely based on that to the Miles Davis 
composition "Tune-up". The latter tune begins with the four measure progression:
| Em7    | A7         | Dmaj7     | Dmaj7 |,
which is a vanilla ii-V-I progression in D major. The first four bars of "Countdown" are:
| Em7 F7 | Bbmaj7 Db7 | Gbmaj7 A7 | Dmaj7 |.
Coltrane starts with the same ii chord, and then modulates to the dominant seventh 
chord one half step higher. From there, he launches into the cycle of major thirds, 
going from the key of Bb to Gb and finally back to D. The next four bars of the tune 
are identical harmonically, except they are based on a ii-V in the key of C; the next 
four bars are the same in the key of Bb. Soloing over Coltrane changes can be challenging, 
since the apparent key center changes so often. You cannot simply play a single diatonic 
scale across several measures. The tunes are usually played at fast tempos, and it is 
also easy to fall into the trap of playing nothing but arpeggios outlining the chords. 
You must try to be especially conscious of playing melodically when soloing over a 
progression as complex as the Coltrane changes.

Modal Improvisation

A typical modal tune may have only two or three chords, and each may last 8 or 
even 16 measures. In one sense, modal playing is much easier than playing changes, 
since it does not require your brain to do as much fast computation to constantly
change scales. In another sense, however, it is more challenging, since you cannot 
merely string together rehearsed ii-V licks, nor can you rely on clever scale use 
and chord substitution to cover up basic problems thinking melodically. Some music 
is often considered modal even though it follows traditional chord progressions 
such as the blues. The concept of modality has as much to do with what is done with 
the harmony as with its rate of change. In bebop derived styles, a soloist may 
sustain interest by his choice of notes over the harmony, including dissonances, 
tensions, and releases. For example, bebop players often enjoyed ending phrases on 
the raised fourth over a dominant chord, just for the effect that one note had.
When soloing over modal music, there is less emphasis on harmonic choices, and 
more on melodic development. The ballad "Blue In Green" from Miles Davis' Kind 
Of Blue has as much harmonic motion as many other tunes, and the chords themselves
are relatively complex chords such as Bbma7#11 or A7alt. Yet the solos on this 
track do not exploit the harmony; instead they focus on melodicism of individual 
phrases. Bebop improvisers may emphasize the chordal extensions in their solos, 
whereas modal improvisers tend to emphasize basic chord notes. Bebop players 
are often more inclined to fill up all spaces with notes to completely define 
the harmony, whereas modal players are more likely to use rhythmic space as a 
melodic structuring element. Both approaches are valid, but it is important to 
understand the differences between them. The Miles Davis tune "So What" on the 
album Kind Of Blue is the classic example of a modal tune. It follows a basic AABA
structure, where the A section consists of the D dorian mode, and the B section 
consists of the Eb dorian mode. This yields 16 consecutive bars of D dorian at the 
beginning of each chorus; 24 counting the last 8 of the previous chorus. You may find
yourself running out of ideas quickly if you limit yourself to just the seven notes 
in the D dorian scale, but that is the challenge. You cannot rely on the consciously 
hip sound of an F# over a C7 chord; you must play melodically with the notes you are
given.
You are not completely restricted to the notes of the scale, however. As with 
ii-V progressions, there are some devices that you can use in a modal setting to 
add tension. One of the most popular of such devices is called sideslipping. Over 
a D dorian background, try playing lines based on Db or Eb scales for a measure or 
two. This dissonance creates a tension, which you can release by returning to the 
original scale. You can also use chromatic passing tones. For instance, over a D 
dorian scale, you might try playing "G, G#, A", where the G# is a passing tone.
You can also vary the scale used. For instance, instead of D dorian, try a D natural 
minor, or a D minor pentatonic, for a few measures. You can also use alternate a 
tonic chord with the dominant seventh chord in that key. For example, the chord
associated with D dorian is Dm7. If you treat that as a i chord, the V7 chord is 
A7. So you can use lines from any of the scales associated with A7, A7b9b5, A7alt, 
or other A dominant seventh chords, at points in your improvisation. This will 
create a kind of tension that you can resolve by returning to the original D 
dorian scale.
For the most part, however, you should try to stick to the modal philosophy when 
playing modal tunes, and concentrate on being as melodic as possible with the 
basic chord and scale tones. Pentatonic scales are an especially appropriate choice in
modal playing, since they narrow your choices to only five notes instead of seven, 
and further force you to think about using space and playing melodically. A similar 
sound is achieved by playing lines built from the interval of a fourth. This is 
called quartal harmony. It is particularly effective in modal tunes with few chord 
changes, although these types of lines can be used in other situations as well.

Chromaticism

Bebop styles were characterized above as exploiting the harmonies by choosing scales 
with a lot of color tones, whereas modal playing was characterized as emphasizing 
the basic chord tones. Both of these approaches still use chord/scale relationships 
in the traditional manner of choosing a scale that implies the sound of the chord to 
some degree, and playing mostly within that scale. Another approach is to maintain 
the sense of chord progressions but play lines that lie largely outside the associated 
scales. This is sometimes called chromaticism. Eric Dolphy used this approach when 
playing with Charles Mingus and on some of his own albums such as Live At The Five 
Spot and Last Date. Woody Shaw and Steve Coleman are also chromatic players.
You have by now probably played some outside notes, say an Ab against a Cmaj7 
chord, possibly by accident. These notes may sound wrong when played in the context 
of an otherwise inside melody. By playing a melody derived from a scale, you 
establish a particular sound, and one wrong note will sound out of place. However, 
when playing a melody that lies mostly outside the scale, the same notes may fit 
in much more logically. That is to say, non-scale tones used melodically can often
sound consonant (the opposite of dissonant).
The aforementioned musicians often play very angular melodic lines, meaning they 
consist of large or unusual intervals and change direction often rather than being 
primarily stepwise and scalelike. This often seems to establish a sound in which wrong
notes sound perfectly natural. Interestingly, the opposite approach works as well: 
lines that contain a lot of half steps often sound right even though they consist 
of many wrong notes. These lines are sometimes called chromatic. You can continue to 
use your knowledge of chord/scale relationships when playing chromatically. For 
example, you know that a Db lydian scale is not normally an appropriate choice to 
play over a Cmaj7 chord, and you probably have some idea why. These same wrong notes, 
however, if used melodically over the chord, create a sound that is not all that 
dissonant and has a harmonic richness that is very modern sounding. In fact, even 
simple melodic ideas like arpeggios and scales can sound complex in this context.
You can practice these ideas with Aebersold albums, or Band-In-A-Box, or your fellow 
musicians, although you should be prepared for some strange looks. It has been said 
that there are no wrong notes, only wrong resolutions. This certainly explains
why passing tones and enclosures sound consonant, but I feel it still places too 
high a value on playing the notes suggested by the standard chord/scale relationships. 
I would restate this; the only wrong notes are notes you didn't intend to play. 
Any note you play is right if it is in a meaningful context and it does not sound 
like an accident. There is even value in making mistakes.
The trick is in forming a coherent whole.

Non-tonal Improvisation

The terms pan-tonal, non-tonal, and atonal all describe the blurring or elimination of 
traditional tonality. The distinction between these terms is not always clear, so I 
will use most general of these, "non-tonal", to describe music that has no specific key
center, or over which standard chord/scale relationships do not always apply.
Although non-tonal music may appear to have chord progressions, the individual chords 
are often chosen for their overall sound rather than for their resolutions. Any chord 
from any key is likely to be used if it has the right sound. For example, many
of the tunes on Miles' albums E.S.P., Nefertiti, Miles Smiles, and Sorcerer have no 
specific key centers, nor do they contain many traditional ii-V's that would indicate 
temporary key centers. Many of the chords are relatively complex, for example 
Abmaj7#5, and each chord is chosen for its individual sound, not because the 
previous chord resolves to it naturally or because it resolves to the next chord. A 
traditional functional analysis of the harmony (that is, analyzing chords in terms 
of their relationship to the key) is not always the best way to approach this sort 
of music. You may wish to treat this music modally, and let the chords themselves 
dictate the scale choices. You should be careful in doing this, however. Many of the 
standard chord/scale relationships were established with traditional resolutions in 
mind. Your phrases may seem random and disconnected if you blindly change scales 
according to the chord progression in non-tonal music. You should be prepared to 
treat the chord/scale relationships more loosely than you would when simply playing
changes.
In tonal music, alterations to a chord are often considered merely color tones that 
do not affect the basic function of a chord, and improvisers are free to make their 
own alterations to the basic chord. For example, a G7b9 chord is likely to be a
dominant chord, resolving to Cmaj7. Any other chord that serves this function, such 
as G7#11, or even a tritone substitution like Db7, can be used instead without 
radically changing how the phrase is perceived, so tonal improvisers will often 
make this sort or alteration freely, either explicitly, or implicitly by their scales 
choices. In non-tonal music, however, a chord is often specifically called for because 
of its unique sound, and not because of how it functions in a progression. The same 
G7b9 chord may have been chosen because of the particular dissonance of the G against 
the Ab, or because that happened to be the most convenient way to spell the chord 
voicing the composer intended (a voicing is simply a way of specifying the particular 
notes to be played for a given chord). Changing this chord to G7#11 may change the 
sound of the chord more radically than substituting an otherwise unrelated chord that 
has the same G/Ab dissonance, such as Abmaj7, or one that may be voiced similarly, such
as E7#9. You may find scale choices associated with these chords to be more appropriate 
substitutions than ones based on the traditional dominant function of G7b9.
The real intent of non-tonal music, however, is to free you from the specifics of 
chord/scale relationships and allow you to concentrate on the sounds themselves. 
The lines you play need not be analyzed in terms of their relationships to the notated
chords, but may instead be thought of in terms of how they fit the sound of the 
phrase at that point. If the chord in a given measure is a maj7#5 chord, then you 
should hear the sound of that chord, and feel free to play any lines that imply that sound.
This is as much an emotional implication as a rational one. For me, that particular 
chord has an open, questioning, sound that I associate with wide intervals and the 
use of rhythmic space. I would probably tend to play lines that reflect this feeling,
regardless of the actual notes involved. Furthermore, the sound of that chord may 
also be affected by its context in the piece itself. For instance, a chord played 
for two measure in a ballad may sound entirely differently from the same chord used 
as an accent in a driving up-tempo piece. Chord scale relationships may still help 
define which notes tend to be more or less dissonant against a given chord, but you 
should try organize your thinking along lines of sounds, and use the chord/scale
relationships only as tools to help you achieve the desired sounds.
Even in tonal music, of course, chord/scale relationships can be considered as tools, 
and one could claim the goal is always to represent sounds. However, you may find 
tunes with many ii-V's in them tend to "sound" the same in this respect. Non-tonal
music was created to provide a more varied palette of sounds, to encourage thinking 
along these lines. As with chromaticism in tonal music, you can deliberately play 
lines that contradict the sound of the chord, if that is the effect you desire. The 
important thing is that you perceive a non-tonal chord progression as a recipe of 
sounds over which you improvise, not as a specific pattern of chord resolutions.

Free Improvisation

The next of level of freedom in improvisation is to eliminate chords entirely. 
Depending on how far you are willing to go, you can also dispense with traditional 
melody, rhythm, timbre, or form. There are many different approaches to free playing, 
but by its very nature, there are no rules. Instead of technical details, examples 
of other musicians will be used for the most part. Many of Ornette Coleman's 
compositions have no chords at all. Most of his freebop quartet recordings with Don 
Cherry for Atlantic fall into this category. The head consists of a melody only, 
and the solos are variations on the melody or on the feel of the piece in general, 
not on any chord progression. For the most part, these recordings still show a very 
melodic approach and are accessible to many listeners. A walking bass line and 4/4 
swing drum beat are constant throughout, and the forms are the standard head-solos-head 
forms.
Ornette's album Free Jazz, featuring a double quartet including Eric Dolphy and 
Freddie Hubbard, is decidedly different. Here Ornette is not only putting aside 
traditional concepts of harmony, but also of melody. There is no definable head 
to the one performance that comprises this album, and the improvisations are 
less melodic than on the quartet albums. The double quartet also experiments 
with form on this album, often having several improvisers playing at once. This 
idea is as old as jazz itself, but was largely forgotten with the advent of the 
swing era. The free players' idea of collective improvisation is much less structured
than the dixieland players', and the results are more cacophonous.
John Coltrane made similar advances late in his career, in albums such as 
"Ascension". Coltrane also experimented with rhythm, especially in albums like 
"Interstellar Space" that do not feature any definable pulse. Both Coleman and 
Coltrane, as well as musicians influenced by them such as Archie Shepp and Albert 
Ayler, also experimented with timbre, finding new ways to get sounds out of 
their instruments, even to the extent of playing instruments on which they had 
little or no training, as Ornette did with the trumpet and the violin.
Cecil Taylor plays the piano in a completely free manner, utilizing it as much 
as a percussion instrument as a melodic or chordal instrument. His performances 
generally do not contain any traditional harmonic, melodic, or rhythmic structuring 
elements. He creates his own structures. When playing free music in a solo setting, 
you have complete freedom to change the directions of the music at any time, and 
are accountable only to yourself. You can change tempo, you can play without tempo, 
you can vary the intensity of your performance as you see fit. When playing 
music with no set form in a group setting, communication becomes especially 
important, because there is no automatic frame of reference to keep everyone 
together. Cecil Taylor does play in a group setting as well, and other groups 
such as the Art Ensemble Of Chicago are known for this type of freedom.
It is hard to analyze these styles of music in terms we are accustomed to 
using. The music must reach us on an emotional level in order to be successful, 
and each person's emotions may be affected differently. It often seems to be 
that the more free the music, the more intensely personal the statement. You 
will need to decide for yourself how far you are willing to go in your own
playing, as well as in your own listening. You should also be aware that this 
type of music is often more fun to play than to listen to for many people. The 
challenge of the communication and the excitement of the free exchange of ideas 
are things that some listeners are unable to appreciate. This a gentle way of 
saying that your experimentation may alienate some of your original audience. However, 
there are audiences that do appreciate this music. You should not be discouraged from 
playing as freely as you desire.