      IT'S ALRIGHT, MA (I'M ONLY BLEEDING)- BOB DYLAN

 G/D  C#6   C6
----------------
-0--------------
-4----3-----2---
-0--------------
-5----4-----3---
----------------

E G A G E G A G E

E                              G/D
darkness at the break of noon shadows even the silver spoon
   E                                   G/D 
a handmade blade the child's balloon eclipses both the sun and moon 
    C#6                          C6                  E      G A G E  G A G E
to understand you know too soon there's no sense in trying.

pointed threats they bluff with scorn suicide remarks are torn 
from the fool's gold mouthpiece to the hollow horn 
plays wasted words proves to warn that he not busy being is busy dying.

temptation's page flies out the door you follow find yourself at war 
watch waterfalls of pity roar you feel the moan but unlike before 
you'll just be one more person crying.
 
               E            B     E                     A
     so don't fear if you hear a foreign sound to your ear
      A    G  C    D             E       G A G E   G A G E        
     it's alright, ma i'm only sighing.

as some warn victory some downfall private reasons great or small 
can be seen in the eyes of those that call to make all 
that should be killed to crawl 
while others say don't hate nothing at all except hatred.

disillusioned words like bullets bark make everything from guns that spark 
to flesh-colored christs that glow in the dark 
it's easy to see without looking too far that not too much is really sacred.

preachers preach of evil fates teachers teach that knowledge waits 
can lead to hundred dollar plates and goodness hides behind its gates 
but even the president of the united states sometimes has to stand naked.

     and though the rules of the road have been lodged 
     it's only people's games that you got to dodge 
     and it's alright ma i can make it  

advertising signs they con you into thinking you're the one
that can do what's never been done that can win what's never been won 
meantime life outside goes on all around you.

you lose yourself you reappear you suddenly find you've got nothing to fear 
alone you stand with nobody near when trembling distant voice unclear 
startles your sleeping ears to hear 
that somebody thinks they really found you.

a question in your nerves is lit yet you know there is no answer fit 
to satisfy insure you not to quit to keep it in your mind not to forget 
that it is not he or she or them or it that you belong to.

     though the masters make the rules 
     for the wise men and the fools i got nothing ma to live up to.

for them that must obey authority that they do not respect in any degree 
those who despise their job and destiny speak jealously of them thatare free 
do what they do to be nothing more that something they invest in.

while some on principles baptize two strict party platform ties 
social clubs and drag disguise outsiders they can freely criticize 
tell them nothing but who to idolize and say god bless him.

while one who sings with his tongue on fire gargles in the rat race choir 
bent out of shape from society's pliers cares not to come up any higher 
but rather gets you down in the hole that he's in.

     but i mean no harm nor put fault on anyone that lives in a vault 
     but it's alright ma if i can't please him.

old lady judges watch people in pairs limited in sex they dare 
to push fake morals insults and stares why money doesn't talk it swears 
obscenity who really cares propaganda all is phony.

while them that defend what they cannot see with a killer's pride security 
it blows their minds most bitterly for them that think death's honesty 
won't fall upon them naturally sometimes must get lonely.

my eyes collide head-on with stuff graveyards false goals i scuff 
and pettiness which plays so rough walk upside-down inside handcuffs 
kick my legs to crash it off say okay i've had enough 
what else can you you show me?

     and if my thought dreams could be seen 
     they'd probably put my head in a guillotine 
     but it's alright ma it's life and life only.