THE JERRY GARCIA guitar style can best be
described as eclectic. Many disparate styles
of music came together in his playing, includ-
ing bluegrass, folk swing be-bop, acoustic
and electric blues jazz and rock. Jerry blend-
ed all of these different influences into a
unique mixture and, along with his band of
like-minded musicians created what can only
be described as Gratetul Dead" music. His
guitar style is as well-defined as that of any
of his musical peers and is actually far more
complex than it might seem on the surface.
	Let's begin our examination of the Garcia
style with a look at the scales iles be most often
used for improvising A scale commonly
found in virtually every type of music, and
especially prevalent in rock, blues and jazz,
is the minor-pentatonic scale (I, b3, 4, 5, b7).
FIGURE 1 illustrates the B minor-pentatonic
scale in the open position. The intervallic
relationships between the root note (B) and
all the other scale tones (G, A, B, D) are
shown between the notation and tab staves.
The minor-pentatonic, spelled intervallical-
ly, is: l(root), b3(minor third), 4, 5, b7 (flat,
or dominant, seventh). Memorize these inter-
vallic relationships, and then try to find oth-
er scale positions of B minor-pentatonic else-
where on the fretboard. In a moment we'll
look at some examples of Jerry's use of the
minor-pentatonic scale in specific solos.
	A common, useful extension of the minor-
pentatonic scale is what's known as the
"blues" scale, which adds one note to the
minor-pentatonic: the b5 (flat five, also known
as the flatted fifth). in the key of B, the b5 is
Bb (a note is "flatted" when it is lowered one
half step, which is one fret; lowering the 5, B,
one half step results in Bb). FIGURE 2 illustrates
the B blues scale, with intervallic relationships
indicated. Memorize this scale pattern, and
then find some of your own.
	The influence of folk and bluegrass
music in Jerry's improvising is apparent in
his frequent use of the major scale. FIGURE
3 illustrates the B major scale with inter-
vallic relationships indicated. Memorize
this scale position and its intervallic rela- I
tionships, then try to find some other major
scale positions on the fretboard.
	Garcia's bluegrass influence would often
crop up in his phrasing. Bluegrass solos are
often built on extended lines of steady, unwa-
vering eighth or 16th notes (check out blue-
grass master flatpicking guitarists Doc Wat-
son and Tony Rice, for example). FIGURE 4A
is an ascending flatpicking exercise based on
the E major scale. Play this exercise slowly
at first, at about quarter note=80, and then
slowly work up to quarter note=l 20 or faster.
Concentrate on playing clean, clearly artic
ulated notes. Slower and cleaner is always
better than faster and sloppier (ah, you knew
that already). FIGURE 4B is a descending exer-
cise that follows a similar pattern.
	Another scale Garcia often used, one com-
monly found in blues, bluegrass, rock and
jazz, is the Mixolydian mode. Mixolydian is
the same as the major scale, with the excep-
tion of the seventh scale degree: in the Mixoly-
dian mode, the seventh is lowered one half
step (one fret). The b7 ("flatted" seventh) also
culminates the minor-pentatonic and blues
scales. FIGURE 5 illustrates the B Mixolydian
mode. Memorize this scale position and its
intervallic relationships, then try to find other
Mixolydian scale positions elsewhere on the
neck. Also, compare B Mixolydian with B
major and take notice of the subtle, but clear,
difference in character between the two scales.
	FIGURE 6 illustrates a descending B
Mixolydian exercise along the lines of the
previously illustrated major scale exercis-
es. Continue this pattern down the B
Mixolydian scale, then try playing it as an
ascending pattern.
	Also of great value to Jerry Garcia's solo
flights was the major-pentatonic scale, heard
predominantly in country and folk music. The
major-pentatonic can be derived by eliminat-
mg the fourth and seventh degrees from the
major scale, resulting in an intervallic spelling
1, 2, 3, 5, 6. FIGURES 7A and 7B illustrate two
of the most commonly used B major-penta-
tonic scale patterns. Memorize, my friends,
then try to figure out other patterns for this
same scale in different areas of the fretboard.
	FIGURES 8 and 9 illustrate two typical
"country" licks using the B major-pentaton-
ic scale. Both licks utilize a "passing tone" (a
note not found in the scale, used as a stepping
stone between two scale tones). In both licks,
G is used as a passing tone between F# and
G#. The result is three chromatic notes, half-
steps apart: F#, G, G# (or, descending, G#, G,
F#). Adept use of chromatic passing tones is
one of the cornerstones of the Garcia soloing
style. At its most adventurous, it lent a "free
jazz" edge to Jerry's improvisations.
	Now let's dig into some bona fide Jerry-
isms. One of his great guitar flights came dur-
ing "Dark Star" from Live Dead. In this 23-
minute interplanetary excursion, Jerry does a
lot of beautiful, hypnotic improvisation. One
of my favorite licks occurs at the 8:50 point,
as Jerry is in the midst of a signature modal
freakout. FIGURE 10 illustrates this two-bar
lick, which is based on the A Mixolydian
mode (A, B, C#, D, B, F#, G), with the inclu-
sion of a D# passing tone. Notice the nifty
way Jerry incorporates an Em7 arpeggio (B,
G, B, D) into the lick, on the upbeat of beat 4
in bar I and moving into beat I of bar 2: Gar-
cia uses the Off passing tone to slide up to B,
followed by G, B and D natural. These last
four notes, superimposed in this case over an
A pedal tone, imply an A9sus4 color.
	The feel of Jerry's phrasing in this exam-
ple and in the majority of his improvisa-
tions over the years is swinging. His solo
lines always present a fluidity akin to that of
Irish fiddle reels and he bop or swing. This
essential element is often missing when gui-
tarists try to emulate the Garcia sound.
	Also based on the Mixolydian mode is
the signature lick from China Cat Sun-
flower," which is derived from G Mixoly-
dian (G, A, B, C D L F) FIGURE 11 depicts
a similar lick, built from a G major triad (G,
B, D), and incorporating an F major triad (F
A, C) on beat 3 of bar 2 Note that both the
G major and F major triads are inherent in
the G Mixolydian mode
	For the tune a solo breaks, Jerry relies
on the G major pentatonic scale (G, A, B,
D, B) when playing over the C chord. FIG-
URE 12 illustrates a four-bar phrase based
on G major-pentatonic, along the lines of
one of Jerry's breaks from the Europe '72
version of "China Cat Sunflower."
	As many of you know, Jerry Garcia was a
talented banjo player and pedal steel player
in addition to being a gifted guitarist. Some
of his most well-known pedal steel work is
heard on Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young's
"Teach Your Children" (Deja Vu). He also
takes a great pedal steel solo on the Ameri-
con Beauty classic, "Sugar Magnolia." FIG-
URE 13 illustrates a similar solo arranged for
guitar. The lines here are based primarily on
the A major-pentatonic scale (A, B, C#, B,
F#), with a brief inclusion of the fourth, D.
The major seventh, G#, is also thrown in as
a momentary reference to the V (five) chord,
B, as G# is the major third of B.
	Another milestone album for the Grateful
Dead is 1970's Workingman 's Dead
(released just prior to American Beauty,
which was also released in '70). To some
people, these two albums represent Garcia
and Robert Hunter at the height of their
songwriting prowess. Workingman's ~ Dead
features the classics "Uncle John's Band,"
"Cumberland Blues" and "Black Peter," as
well as the time-honored "Casey Jones."
	FIGURE 14 depicts Jerry's "Casey Jones"
solo, which is based primarily on a combina-
lion of C major-pentatonic (C, D, B, G, A) and
F major-pentatonic (F G, A, C, D) scales.
Notice that the two scales are identical except
for one note: C major-pentatonic adds B to C,
B, G and A, and F major pentatonic adds F to
C, D, G and A. Jerry also throws in a chro-
matic line as he connects C major-pentaton-
ic and F major-pentatonic in bar 2-he
descends chromatically, C-B-Bb, moving into
A (bent up from G) over the F chord.
	Garcia also combines two major-penta-
tonic scales in "St. Stephen." FIGURE 15A
illustrates four bars from the intro of the Live
Dead version of the song, in which he moves
between the tonic scale, B major-pentatonic
(B, F#, G#, B, C~, and D major-pentatonic
(D, B, F~ A, B). The little bits of D major-
pentatonic appear on beat 3 of bars I and 3
only (with the notes P11, E and D); the rest is
based on B major-pentatonic.
	At 3:37, the whole band plays an ensemble
figure which is similar to this intro lick; this
figure is shown in FIGURE 15B. Bars 1-3 make
reference to the E blues scale, with the inclu-
sion of the second, F#, and bar 4 utilizes E
Mixolydian. Be aware of the shifting 16th-
note syncopations throughout, in particular
the use of 16th-note rests.
	Let's jump back to American Beauty for a
second to take a look at "Truckin'." This mas-
terpiece does not have a guitar solo section-
only little breaks between the verses, filled
either by guitar or keyboards. Jerry does take
a little four-bar-break on the song's intro, illus-
trated in FIGURE 16A. This break is based pri-
marily on E minor-pentatonic, but alludes to
E Mixolydian with the bending of most of the
0 notes up to 011, which is the major third of
E. Jerry brings in the E blues scale with the
inclusion of the b5, Bb, in bar 4.
	For his four-bar break preceding the
bridge, Jerry utilizes notes from the E
major-pentatonic scale (E, Fit, C#, B, C#).
See FIGURE 1GB.
	Up to this point, all of the solo excerpts
we 've examined are played over just one or
two chords. For the song "Deal;' from his
first solo album, Garcia, Jerry was faced
with playing over a more complex chord pro-
gression than usual. He comes through with
flying colors, playing "with the changes"
while maintaining spontaneity and fluidity.
FIGURE 17 is along the lines of his eight-bar
solo, which, for bars 1-5, is primarily based
on the A major-pentatonic scale (A, B, C#,
E, Fit). The B note in bar 2 is bent up to C#
to make reference to Cit7, and a bit of chro-
maticism is employed moving into bar 3 to
outline the F#m chord. Over the first two
beats of bar 3, A major-pentatonic is played
over F#m; the same notes that comprise A
major-pentatonic make up Fit minor-penta-
tonic (F#, A, B, C#, F). This is because F#
is the "relative minor" of A.
	In bar 6,Ait is played in place of A to relate
to the Fit chord (A# is the major third of Fit).
A similar maneuver is employed in bar 7, as
D# is played over the B chord (D# is the
major third of B). The phrase is deftly round-
ed off with clear references to the D chord via
a D major-pentatonic lick, which is then
phrased beautifully back into A major-pen-
tatonic for the return to the A chord.
	Our last musical example is from 1975's
Blues For Allah, an adventurous album that
marked the evolving nature of the band's
music. The album opens with the beautiful
"Help On The Way," segueing seamlessly
into "Slipknot!" and "Franklin's Tower."
"Slipknot!" in which shifting groups of
minor-seventh arpeggios weave through an
unusual chord progression, features com-
posed material that is outside the usual para-
meters of the Grateful Dead's music. It is
one of the most interesting, and jazz-influ-
enced, compositions in the Dead canon. FIG-
URE 18 illustrates the abovementioned riff.
	So long, Jerry, and thanks. Your music will
live on and continue to inspire us.
