H.L. Mencken (1880-1956) 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the time of the Scopes trial, H. L. Mencken was America's leading 
journalist. His popular columns were marked by a flair for exaggeration, 
caustic wit, and a hostility to prohibition, censorship, and other attempts 
to purify America.

Mencken came to Dayton as a writer for the Baltimore Sun and the Mercury. 
The Baltimore Sun was hardly an unbiased observer of the trial, having 
agreed to pay part of the defense team's expenses. 

Mencken arrived in Dayton with four bottles of Scotch and his typewriter, 
immediately finding plenty to comment on. After a few nights in Dayton, 
Mencken said, "the thing is genuinely fabulous--I have stored up enough 
material to last me twenty years."

Mencken earned the enmity of the people of Dayton after calling them 
"yokels", "primates", "morons", "half-wits", and "hillbillies", among 
other things. He had to be saved from an assaulting mob by the Dayton 
sheriff. Mencken's treatment of Bryan was even harsher than that of the 
local citizenry. He called Bryan an "unmitigated ass" and said that if 
Bryan was sincere, then so was P. T. Barnum.

After the trial, Mencken continued to fight against the forces of censorship 
and puritanism, though targets became scarcer in the 1930's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Quotes from H.L. Mencken
------------------------------------------------------------------------


1.All I ask is equal freedom. When it is denied, as it always is, I take it anyhow. 


2.The urge to save humanity is almost always only a false-face for the urge to rule it. 


3.The most costly of all follies is to believe passionately in the palpably not true. 
It is the chief occupation of mankind. 


4.The kind of man who wants the government to adopt and enforce his ideas is always 
the kind of man whose ideas are idiotic. 


5.No matter how happily a woman may be married, it always pleases her to discover 
that there is a nice man who wishes that she were not. 


6.Puritanism: The haunting fear that someone, somewhere, may be happy. 


7.The psychologists and the metaphysicians wrangle endlessly over the nature of the 
thinking process in man, but no matter how violently they differ otherwise they all 
agree that it has little to do with logic and is not much conditioned by overt facts. 


8.Any man who inflicts the human race with ideas must be prepared to see them misunderstood. 


9.Of government, at least in democratic states, it may be said briefly that it is an 
agency engaged wholesale, and as a matter of solemn duty, in the performance of acts 
which all self-respecting individuals refrain from as a matter of common decency. 


10.War will never cease until babies begin to come into the world with larger 
cerebrums and smaller adrenal glands. 


11.Philosophy consists very largely of one philosopher arguing that all other 
philosophers are jackasses. He usually proves it, and I should add that he also 
usually proves that he is one himself. 


12.And what is a good citizen? Simply one who never says, does or thinks anything 
that is unusual. Schools are maintained in order to bring this uniformity up to the 
highest possible point. A school is a hopper into which children are heaved while 
they are still young and tender; therein they are pressed into certain standard 
shapes and covered from head to heels with official rubber-stamps. 


13.Demagogue: one who preaches doctrines he knows to be untrue to men he knows to be idiots. 


14.It is the invariable habit of bureaucracies, at all times and everywhere, to 
assume...that every citizen is a criminal. Their one apparent purpose, pursued 
with a relentless and furious diligence, is to convert the assumption into a fact. 
They hunt endlessly for proofs, and, when proofs are lacking, for mere suspicions. 
The moment they become aware of a definite citizen, John Doe, seeking what is his 
right under the law, they begin searching feverishly for an excuse for withholding 
it from him. 


15.It is only doubt that creates. It is only the minority that counts. 


16.Government, in its very essence, is opposed to all increase in knowledge. Its 
tendency is always towards permanence and against change...[T]he progress of 
humanity, far from being the result of government, has been made entirely without 
its aid and in the face if its constant and bitter opposition. 


17.For men become civilized, not in proportion to their willingness to believe, 
but in proportion to their readiness to doubt. 


18.God is the immemorial refuge of the incompetent, the helpless, the miserable. 
They find not only sanctuary in His arms, but also a kind of superiority, soothing 
to their macerated egos; He will set the above their betters. 


19.There is only one honest impulse at the bottom of Puritanism, and that is the 
impulse to punish the man with a superior capacity for happiness. 


20.We must respect the other fellow's religion, but only in the sense and to the 
extent that we respect his theory that his wife is beautiful and his children smart. 


21.The true function of art is to...edit nature and so make it coherent and lovely. 
The artist is a sort of impassioned proofreader, blue-penciling the bad spelling of God. 


22.The world always makes the assumption that the exposure of an error is identical 
with the discovery of truth--that the error and truth are simply opposite. They are 
nothing of the sort. What the world turns to, when it is cured on one error, is 
usually simply another error, and maybe one worse than the first one. 


23.No one in this world, so far as I know- and I have researched the records for 
years, and employed agents to help me- has ever lost money by underestimating the 
intelligence of the great masses of the plain people. Nor has anyone ever lost 
public office thereby. 


24.All government, in its essence, is organized exploitation, and in virtually all of 
its existing forms it is the implacable enemy of every industrious and well-disposed man. 


25.The notion that a radical is one who hates his country is naive and usually idiotic. 
He is, more likely, one who likes his country more than the rest of us, and is thus more 
disturbed than the rest of us when he sees it debauched. He is not a bad citizen 
turning to crime; he is a good citizen driven to despair. 


26.Nature abhors a moron. 


27.It is the fundamental theory of all the more recent American law...that the 
average citizen is half-witted, and hence not to be trusted to either his own 
devices or his own thoughts. 


28.The New Deal began, like the Salvation Army, by promising to save humanity. It 
ended, again like the Salvation Army, by running flop-houses and disturbing the peace. 


29.Every failure teaches a man something, to wit, that he will probably fail again. 


30.Democracy is the art of running the circus from the monkey cage. 


31.I believe there is a limit beyond which free speech cannot go, but it's a limit 
that's very seldom mentioned. It's the point where free speech begins to collide 
with the right to privacy. I don't think there are any other conditions to free 
speech. I've got a right to say and believe anything I please, but I haven't got 
a right to press it on anybody else. .... Nobody's got a right to be a nuisance 
to his neighbors. 


32.The idea that the sole aim of punishment is to prevent crime is obviously 
grounded upon the theory that crime can be prevented, which is almost as dubious 
as the notion that poverty can be prevented. 


33.To wage a war for a purely moral reason is as absurd as to ravish a woman for 
a purely moral reason. 


34.We suffer most when the White House busts with ideas. 


35.The only good bureaucrat is one with a pistol at his head. Put it in his hand 
and it's good-by to the Bill of Rights. 


36.The only kind of freedom that the mob can imagine is freedom to annoy and 
oppress its betters, and that is precisely the kind that we mainly have. 


37.The worst government is the most moral. One composed of cynics is often very 
tolerant and humane. But when fanatics are on top there is no limit to oppression. 


38.No one ever heard of the truth being enforced by law. Whenever the secular arm 
is called in to sustain an idea, whether new or old, it is always a bad idea, and 
not infrequently it is downright idiotic. 


39.People constantly speak of "the government" doing this or that, as they might 
speak of God doing it. But the government is really nothing but a group of men, 
and usually they are very inferior men. They may have some better man working for 
them, but they themselves are seldom worthy of any respect. 


40.It is common to assume that human progress affects everyone- that even the 
dullest man, in these bright days, knows more than any man of, say, the Eighteenth 
Century, and is far more civilized. This assumption is quite erroneous...The great 
masses of men, even in this inspired republic, are precisely where the mob was at 
the dawn of history. They are ignorant, they are dishonest, they are cowardly, they 
are ignoble. They know little if anything that is worth knowing, and there is not 
the slightest sign of a natural desire among them to increase their knowledge. 


41.Every step in human progress, from the first feeble stirrings in the abyss of 
time, has been opposed by the great majority of men. Every valuable thing that has 
been added to the store of man's possessions has been derided by them when it was 
new, and destroyed by them when they had the power. They have fought every new truth 
ever heard of, and they have killed every truth-seeker who got into their hands. 


42.We must think of human progress, not as of something going on in the race in 
general, but as something going on in a small minority, perpetually beleaguered 
in a few walled towns. Now and then the horde of barbarians outside breaks 
through, and we have an armed effort to halt the process. That is, we have a 
Reformation, a French Revolution, a war for democracy, a Great Awakening. The 
minority is decimated and driven to cover. But a few survive- and a few are 
enough to carry on. 


43.The human race is divided into two sharply differentiated and mutually 
antagonistic classes, almost two genera- a small minority that plays with 
ideas and is capable of taking them in, and a vast majority that finds them
painful, and is thus arrayed against them, and against all who have traffic 
with them. The intellectual heritage of the race belongs to the minority, and 
to the minority only. The majority has no more to do with it than it has to do 
with ecclesiastic politics on Mars. In so far as that heritage is apprehended, 
it is viewed with enmity. But in the main it is not apprehended at all. 


44.Under democracy one party always devotes its chief energies to trying to prove 
that the other party is unfit to rule--and both commonly succeed, and are right. 


45.All human progress, even in morals, has been the work of men who have doubted 
the current moral values, not of men who have whooped them up and tried to enforce 
them. 
