THE TRADITION
OF IRISH DRINKING SONGS

"My darling she told me to drink no more or my life would be over in a 
little while But I told her it's the whiskey that gives me life and 
strength And lengthens my road by many's the mile 
(Cathal Bui Mac Giolla Gunna)"

Drink has long been a favorite topic among Irish and Irish-American 
songwriter and singers. Impassioned lyrics throughout the centuries 
speak to the euphoria it creates, the courage it gives, the gaiety it 
sustains, the pain it eases, the ravages it causes.
But do Irish drinking songs glorify drink and drinking? Yes they do 
but mostly with tongue-in-cheek. It would be hard, for example, to
accept this refrain from a 1920s Irish American stage classic as a 
literal prescription for a daily regimen:

"Oh a drink in the morning is good for the sight, 
and twenty or thirty between that and night.
Drink it up, go to bed, and just think it's no sin
to be up in the morning and at it again.
Sure if I were to throw me in Cruiskeen Lawn again,
Then who'd drown the shamrock on St. Patrick's Day.
In Winter or Summer or June or July,
drinking poitin each day 'til I die."

It would also probably be hard to god an Irish person who hasn't at some 
point or another come in direct personal contact with the dismal 
consequences of overindulgence in drink. But Irish people do not 
generally choose to express negative attitudes towards
alcohol in song. There are other appropriate ways to do that. An odd 
drinking song hints at the dark side, but Irish drinking songs have never 
been prone to dwell too much on pessimistic thoughts or sentiments.
There are songs that refer to passing to the topic of drink and there are 
songs exclusively devoted to the subject of drink and drinking. The vast 
majority sing the praises of alcohol. There is a kind of existential 
defiance in the best of them. Sometimes the harsh necessity of facing 
tomorrow is too hard to think about tonight.
At its pinnacle. the drinking song laughs and scoffs at intolerable 
reality and even at death itself. A popular Irish American stage song 
proclaims the message:

"When death does appear to be it sent for my sake
to claim up O'Reilly the rollicking rake.
He's not dead, I'll answer, and all is serene.
For immune is O'Reilly from drinkin poitin"

This compilation presents songs that are, in one way or another, 
connected with the theme of strong drink. Most of them are Irish in 
origin. However Irish singers have never been reluctant to borrow 
songs from outside the tradition. So the songs on this recording
are an eclectic mixture. They come from Australia ("The Pub With No 
Beer"), England ("All For Me Grog.", "Beer, Beer, Beer"), Irish oral 
tradition and the Irish stage and music hall, "Drink It Up Men," 
"Kilgarry Mountain," ("Whiskey In The Jar"], "The Juice
Of The Barley," "Maloney Wants A Drink," "Jog Of This", "Whiskey, 
You're The Devil," "A Jog Of Punch," "The Mooonshiner" "Water Is 
Alright In Tay"), and some are drawn from the Irish American stage 
tradition. Irish drinking songs were hugely popular American 
vaudeville and variety theater. Irish drunken brawls were de 
rigueur on the 19th century American stage where ethnic stereotypes 
types abounded. The Irish party song was staple genre. The scenario 
was always the same. A party was given, guests were invited, drink 
was consumed in large quantities, insults flew, fighting erupted and the
party broke up in mayhem.
"Finnegan's Wake" is a good example of the genre. It became popular in 
Irish-America variety theater in the 1860s and was immortalized when 
James Joyce used the title to name his most famous work.
	New York impresario, playwright and actor Ed Harrigan, wrote 
the words of "Mountain Dew" in the early 187)s. His collaborator, David 
Braham composed the music, and the song became one of his biggest hits 
and was reprinted in the scores of songsters. The song was given a new 
lease on life in the 1960s when it was recorded and popularized by The 
Clancy Brothers with Tommy Makem.
Parodies of well known songs has'e always comic stage songs. Tommy. Mak
and The Clancy' Brothers' spoof of "Galway Bay" is in this tradition,
The natural millieu of the drinking song is where alcohol is consumed. 
In Irish life, this is most commonly the local pub. In America it's the 
Irish bar, particularly on St. Patrick's Day when green beer ranks op 
there with shamrocks, shillelaghs and leprechauns and
the most common conventional images of Irish American popular culture. 
Irish bars are part of the fabric of Irish-American social life.
Entertainers who perform in these bars will you that they are always 
expected to throw a couple of drinking songs in the course of an
evening. The customers and the management like it when they do. It's 
part of the "scene."

THE ARTISTS
The singers of the drinking songs on this recording are The Dubliners 
and The Clancy Brothers with Tommy Makem; the two most popular Irish 
folk singing groups since the 1960s. Both groups are known for their 
performances of drinking songs. The Clancy Brothers with Tommy Makem
were four young Irish actors who decided to switch careers nod become 
professional Irish folk entertainers in the late l96Os when they
were living in New York City at the time of American Folk Revival. 
They came up with exciting new way of performing the old Irish
traditional songs and ballads they had heard in their youth. This made 
them instantly appealing to general audiences in America. They
incorporated guitar and five-string banjo and lusty harmony singing 
in their arrangement the songs and achieved enormous commercial
success on both sides of the Atlantic while starting a whole revival 
of interest in Irish song back in Ireland in the process.
The colorful Dubliners, the bearded Bohemians of the Irish folk scene were
a sensation when they first started performing as a group in Dublin 
in the earls 1960s. The Dubliners were the perfect pub group with
hard-living hard-drinking image. Working class, middle class, and 
college audiences adored them and roared choruses to songs
enthusiastically along with them on Saturday nights, with foaming, 
table-tapping, glasses clinking a boozy accompaniment. Their music
was rambunctiously compelling. Nobody ever heard anything quite like 
it before. They introduced Irish audiences to a whole new
repertoire of traditional and contemporary folk songs from Britain 
and Ireland. The final drink of a convivial evening is often
a highly emotionally charged event among the Irish. The communal 
drink salutes the ties a friendship and companionship and helps ease
the pain of parting. There is no more eloquent and poignant song on 
this topic than "The Parting Glass." The Clancy Brothers
traditionally close their concerts with this and it also fittingly 
closes this recording.

"Of all the money that ere I spent,
I spent it in good company.
And all the harm that e're I've done
Alas it was to none but me.
And all I've done for want of wit
To memory now I can't recall.
So till to me the parting glass.
Goodnight and joy be with you all."

-Mick Maloney
Philadelphia, September 1992                        



WHISKEY IN THE JAR 
(Traditional, arranged by the Dubliners)

C                       Am       
As I was going over the far fam'd Kerry mountain,
F                                   C   
I met with Captain Farrell, and his money he was countin
C                                 Am
I first produced my pistol, and I then produced my rapier
F                              C   
Sayin':	"Stand and deliver for you are my bold deceiver.


      G 
Musha ring dum a doo dum a da,
C
Whack fol de daddy o
F
Whack fol de daddy o
C       G              C   
There's whiskey in the jar

He counted out his money. and it made a pretty penny.
I put it in my pocket, and gave it to my Jenny.
She sighed, and she swore that she would never betray me,
But the devil take the women for they never can be easy.

I went into my chamber all for to take a slumber,
I dreamt of gold and jewels and for sure it was no wonder,
But Jenny drew my charges, and she tilled them up with water,
An' she sent for Captain Farrell, to be ready for the slaughter.

And 'twas early in the morning before I rose to travel,
Up comes a hand of footmen and likewise, Captain Farrell
I then produced my pistol for she stole away my rapier,
But I couldn't shoot the water, so a prisoner I was taken.

If any one can aid me 'tis my brother in the army.
If I could learn his station, in Cork or in Killarney,
And if he'd come and join me we'd go roving in Kilkenny,
I'll engage he'd treat me fairer than my darling sporting Jenny.

BEER, BEER, BEER 
(E. Winter/The Clancy Scothers)

D     D/C#  D/B 
Beer, beer, beer,
        D     D/C#  D/B 
Tiddley beer, beer, beer.

D 
A long time ago, way back in history
                                G                   A   
When all there was to drink was nothing but cups of tea
D
Along came a man by the name of Charlie Mops
                                         A              D   
And he invented a wonderful drink and he made it out of hops

D
He must have been an admiral, a sultan or a King
                   G               A
And to his praises we shall always sing
D                                  G                 D
Look what he has done for us, he's filled us up with cheer
D                           A                D
Lord bless Charlie Mops the man who invented beer

Beer, beer, beer,
Tiddley beer, beer, beer.

The Furey's bar, the Clancy's pub, the hole in the wall as well
Of one thing you can he sure of, it's Charlie's beer they sell
So come on all me lucky lads, at eleven o'clock ye stop
For five short seconds, remember Charlie Mops
One, two, three, four, five.

A barrel of malt a bushel of hops, You stir it around with a stick
The type of lubrication to make your engine tick
Forty pints of wallop a day will keep away the quacks
It's only eight pence halpenny a pint and one and six in tax

WATER IS ALRIGHT IN TAY 
(S McGrath)

                                   G
The French drink wine, the English tay
                               C   
The Yankee gulps his hot black coffee
                                   G  
The child drinks milk nine times a day
                              C
The Scotsman sips his whiskey toddy
                                     C
You can keep your wine and keep your tay
                              G
My curse on him that gives me coffee
                      F
I'll have porter if I may
G                            C
It makes me feel content and happy

(chorus)
C                          G
Porter quaffed down with a laugh
G                            C  
The gentry have their aching livers
C                   G 
Water is alright in tay,
G                                C
For fish and things that swim in rivers

The poor man and the beggar too
The poet in the corner thinking
If they had money enough to spend
It's pints of porter they'd be drinking

The miser hoards and stores his gold
The bee collects the Summer honey
When miser's dead and cold
Someone else will kiss his money

Some go in for counting beads
More go in for chasing women
The scholar stays at home and reads
Give me the glass with porter in it.

MOUNTAIN DEW 
(Arr. & adapted by P./T.& W. Clancy/T. Makem)
guitar capoed up 2 frets
          C                F
Where the grasses grow and waters flow
     C             G
In a free and easy way.
    C                     F
But give me enough of the rare old stuff
       C         G      C   
That's made near Galway Bay.
    C
And policemen all from Donegal.
                  Am
Sligo and Leitrim too,
      C                      F   
We'll give them the slip and we'll take a sip
       C        G        C 
Of the real old Mountain Dew

Hi the dithery idle loo, ditheri oodle idle loo
Dithery oo di dithery i day
Hi the dithery idle loo, ditheri oodle idle loo
Dithery oo di dithery i day

At the top of the hill there's a neat little still,
Where the smoke curls up in the sky;
By the smoke and the smell you can plainly tell
That there's poteen brewing nearby;
It fills the air with an odor rare
And between both me and you,
When home we roll we'll take a bowl
Or a bucket of the Mountain Dew.

Now learned men who use the pen
They sing your praises high
That sweet poteen from Ireland green
Distilled from wheat and rye;
Throw away your pills, it will cure all ills
Pagan or Christian or Jew
Take off your coat and grease your throat
With the real old Mountain Dew

JUG OF THIS
(Arr. & adapted by P./T.& W. Clancy/T. Makem)
guitar capoed up 1 fret

Em
Ye mourners all as you pass by
                             D 
Come in and drink if you are dry
     Em                             G
Just call your drinks and think not amiss
             D                Em   
And pop your nose in a jug of this

When I am old and can scarcely groan
With an old grey beard and a head that's bald
Crown my desire and fulfill my wish
A pretty young girl and a jug of this

When I am in my grave and dead
And all my sorrows are past and fled
Transport me then into a fish
And let me swim in a jug of this

THE PUB WITH NO BEER 
(G. Parsons)

--3-2-5-3------------0-----2-0----------------------
----------3--0-1-0-1---0-3-----3--0-1-0-------------
--------------------------------2-------2-0---------
----------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------

     G                       C 
It's lonesome away from your kindred and all
       D                                         G
By the camp fire at night where the wild dingoes call
But there's nothing so lonesome so morbid or drear
Than to stand in a bar of a pub with no beer.

Now the publican's anxious for the quota to come
There's a far away look on the face of the bum
The maid's gone all cranky and the cook's acting queer
What a terrible place is a pub with no beer.

Then the swaggie comes in smother'd in dust and flies
He throws down the roll, rubs the sweat from his eyes
But when he is told he says "what's this I hear
I've walked fifty miles to a pub with no beer."

There's a dog on the verandah for his master he waits
But his boss is inside drinking wine with his mates
He hurries for cover and he cringes in fear
It's no place for a dog 'round a pub with no beer.

Old Billy the blacksmith the tirst time in his life
Has gone home cold sober to his darling wife
He walks in the kitchen, she says you're early me dear
But he breaks down and he tells her the pub's got no beer.

DRINK IT UP MEN
(B. Meek. arr. by The Dubliners)

       C                             F           C
At the pub at the crossroads there's whiskey and beer
        C                            G         C
There's brandy, strong cognac that's aging for years
        C                          F          C 
But for killing the thirst and for easing the gout
        C                      G            C  
There's nothing at all heats a pint of good stout
C                    G          C 
Drink it up men it's long after ten

At the pub at the crossroads I first went astray
There I drank enough drink for to fill Galway Bay
Going up in the morning I wore out me shoes
Going up to the cross for the best of good booze
Drink it up men it's long after ten

Some folks oe'r the water think bitter is tine
And others they swear by the juice of the vine
But there's nothing that's squeezed from the grape or the hop
Like the black liquidation with the froth on the top
Drink it up men it's long after ten 

I've travelled in England I've travelled in France
At the sound of good music I'll sing or I'll dance
So hear me then mister and pour me one more
If I can't drink it up, then throw me out the door
Drink it up men it's long after ten

It's Guinesse's porter that has me this way
For it's sweeter than buttermilk and stronger than tay
And when in the morning I feel kind of rough
Me curse on Lord Iveagh who brews the stuff
Drink it up men it's long after ten

MALONEY WANTS A DRINK
(D. Behan)

     F                          Bb
When Eve was in the garden Adam climbed an apple tree
   C                                             F         
He went aloft up to the top to see what he could see
He gazed in awe for what he saw, it made the poor man grieve
Oh Patrick John Maloney stood there whispering to Eve

Ah kiss me love, and miss me love, and dry your bitter tears
My loving you'll remember now for many, many years
Be happy love, be satistied I left you in the pink
There's many a man may want a bride; Maloney wants a drink

Salome danced for Paddy taking off her seven veils
Salome said Maloney that's a trick that never fails
Maloney put Salome's only clothing in a sack
I'll run along now to the pawn and bring your bundle back

From London to Nebraska, and from Glasgow to Hong Kong
From Cardiff to Alaska, from Peking to Saigon
Ah wherever the girls are lonely I know that in his role
Ah it's there you'll tind Maloney a waiting to console

ALL FOR ME GROG
(P./T.& W. Clancy/T. Makem)

F                        Bb          F
It's all for me grog, me jolly jolly grog,
F                   C
All for me beer and tobacco
      F                         Bb               F 
For I spent all me tin with the lassies drinking gin
    F                  Bb           C  F
Far across the western ocean I must wander

Where are me boots, me noggin noggin boots
All gone for beer and tobacco
For the uppers are worn out and the soles are kicked about
And the heels are looking out for better weather

Where is me shirt, me noggin noggin shirt
All gone for beer and tobacco
For the collar is all worn and the front it is all torn
And the tail is looking out for better weather.

I'm sick in the head and I havn't been to bed
Since I came ashore with me plunder
I've seen centipedes and snakes and I'm full of pains and aches
And I think I'll make a path for way out yonder

GALWAY BAY 
(A. Cohahan)
guitar capoed up 3 frets

C                                    G7
Maybe some day I'll go back again to Ireland
                                    E  
If my dear old wife would only pass away
    C                                  F   
She nearly has my heart broke with her naggin'
            G7                     C 
She's got a mouth as big as Galway Bay

See her drinking sixteen pints of Pabst Blue Ribbon
And then she can walk out without a sway
If the sea was beer instead of salty water
She'd live and die in Galway Bay

See her drinking sixteen pints at Padgo Murphy's
The barman says I think it's time to go
Well she doesn't try to speak to him in Gaelic
In a language that the clergy do not know

On her back she has tattooed a map of Ireland
And when she takes her bath on Saturday
She rubs the Sunlight soap around by Claddagh
Just to watch the suds flow down by Galway Bay

A JUG OF PUNCH 
(F. Mc Peake arr. P. Kennedy)
guitar capoed up 3 frets
C                            
One pleasant evening in the month of June,
   G7                    C
As I was sitting with my glass and spoon,
                       F
A small bird sat on an ivy bunch,
        C       F    C     G      C  
And the song he sang was a jug of punch.

       C                  F   
Toor-a-loor-a-loo, toor-a-loor-a-lay.
       G                  C               
Toor-a-loor-a-loo, toor-a-loor-a-lay.
                        F  
A small bird sang on an ivy bunch,
        C       F    C     G      C        
And the song he sang was a jug of punch.

What more diversion could a man desire,
Than to sit him down by an snug turf fire,
Upon his knee a pretty wench,
Ay and on the table a jug of punch.

Lot the doctors come with all their art,
They'll make no impression upon my heart,
Even the cripple forgets his hunch.
When he's snug outside of a jug of punch.
If I get drunk, well the money's me own,
And them don't like it they can leave me alone,
I'll tune my fiddle and I'll rosin my bow,
And I'll be welcome wherever I go.

When I'm dead ay and in my grave.
No costly tombstone will I have,
Just lay me down in my native peat.
With a jug of punch at my head and feet.

TIM FINNEGAN'S WAKE 
(Arr. & adapted by P./T.& W. Clancy/T. Makem)

    C                 Am
Tim Finnegan lived in Watling Street,
  F                   G
A gentleman Irishman -mighty odd -
He'd a beautiful brogue, so rich and sweet,
And to rise in the world, he carried A hod.
You see he'd a sort of a tippling way;
With a love for the liquor poor Tom was born,
And to help him on with his work every day,
He'd a drop of the craythur every morn.

Whack fol-de-dah now dance to your partner
Welt the floor, your trotters shake,
Wasn't it the truth I tould ye?
Lots of fun at Finnegan's wake

One morning Tim was rather full;
His head felt heavy, which made him shake,
He fell from the ladder, and broke his skull,
So they carried him home his corpse to wake.
They rolled him up in a nice clean sheet,
And laid him out upon the bed,
With a bottle of whiskey at his feet,
And a gallon of porter at his head.

His friends assembled at his wake;
And missus Finnegan called for lunch.
First they brought in tay and cake;
Then pipes, tobacco and whiskey-punch,
Then Biddy O'Brien began to cry;
Such a nice clean corpse did you ever see?
Arrah! Tim avourneen, why did you die?'
Arrah hould your gob sez Billy Magee.

Then Peggy O'Connor took up the job,
"Arrah Biddy," says she "Ye're wrong. I'm sure,"
But Biddy then gave her a belt on the gob.
And left her sprawling on the fiure.
Each side in war did soon engage.
'Twas woman to woman and man to man,
Shillelab-law was all the rage-
An' a row an' a ruction soon began.

Then Mickey Moloney raised his head
When a bottle of whiskey flew at him.
It missed him, falling on the bed,
The liquor scattered over Tim!
Tim revives! See how he rises!
Timothy rising from the bed
Crying whirl your whiskey around like blazes
Glory be to God, do ye think I'm dead.

THE MOONSHINER 
(Arr. & adapted by P./T.& W. Clancy/T. Makem)
 
     F                     Bb
I've been a moonshiner for many ayear,
     C                     F
I've spent all my money on whiskey and beer,
I'll go to some hollow and set up my still,
And I'll make you a gallon for a ten shilling bill.

I'm a rambler, I'm a gambler, I'm a long way from home,
And if you don't like me, You can leave me alone.
I'll eat when I'm hungry, I'll drink when I'm dry,
And if moonshine won't kill me I'll live till I die

I'll go to some hollow in this counterie,
Ten gallons of wash I can go on the spree,
No woman to follow, the world is all mine
I love none so well as I love the moonshine

Moonshine, dear moonshine, oh! how I love thee,
You killed my poor father, but dare you try me,
Now bless all moonshiners and bless all moonshine,
Their breath smells as sweet as the dew on the vine.

THE JUICE OF THE BARLEY 
(Arr. and adapted by L. Clancy)
guitar capoed up 3 frets

       G                         C             G
In the sweet County Limerick one cold winter's night,
                                      C             D      
Oh the turf fires were burning when I first saw the light;
      G                         C          G    
And a drunken old mid-wife went tipsy with joy
       G                               C         D
As she danced round the floor with her slip of a boy.

(chorus)
G                 C        G
Singing bainne na mo is an gamna,
        G            D          G 
And the juice of the barley for me.

Well when I was a garsun of eight years or so,
With me turf and me primer to school I did go;
To a dirty old school house without any door,
Where lay the school master blind drunk on the floor.

At the learning I wasn't such a genius I'm thinking.
But I soon bate the master entirely at drinking,
Not a wake nor a wedding for five miles around,
But meself in the corner was sure to be found.

One Sunday the priest read me out from the altar,
Saying you'll end up your days with your neck in a halter,
And you'll dance a fine jig between heaven and hell
And his words they did frighten me the truth for to tell

So the very next morning as the dawn it did break
I went down to the vestry the pledge for to take
And there in that room sat the priests in a bunch
Round a big roaring tire, drinking tumblers of punch

Well from that day to this I have wandered alone
I'm a Jack of all trades and I'm master of none
With the sky for me roof and the earth for me floor
And I'll dance out me days drinking whiskey galore

WHISKEY, YOU'RE THE DEVIL 

C                                 F          C
Whiskey, you're the devil, you're leading me astray
F              C         G
Over hills and mountains unto Amerikay
       C                                  F   
You're sweeter, stronger, decenter you're spunkier than tay
   C                                  G  C
Oh whiskey you're me darlin' drunk or sober.

Now brave boys we're off for marching off for Portugal and Spain
Drums are beating, banners flying The divil a home we'll come tonight
Love fare thee well With me tuddery idle loodle lum a da
Me tiddery idle loodle lum a da Me right fol tooral addee 
There's whiskey in the jar.

Said the mother do not wrong me Don't take me daughter from me
For if you do I will torment you And after death me ghost will haunt you
Love fare thee well With me tiddery idle loodle lum a da
Me tuddery idle loodle lum a da Me right fol tooral addee 
There's whiskey in the jar.

Now the French are fightin' bouldly Men are dying hot and couldly
Give every men his flask of powder His firelock on his shoulder,
Love fare thee well With me tiddelly idle loodle lum a da
Me tidddely idle loodle lum a da Me rex fol tooral adder 
There's whiskey in the jar.

THE PARTING GLASS 
(Arr. and adapted by P. Clancy)
guitar capoed up 2 frets

   C                        G7
Oh all the money that ere I spent,
                   C 
I spent it in good company.
    C                           G7
And all the harm that e're I've done
 C   F  C      G        C
Alas it was to none but me.
    C   G    C    F   C    F  Am
And all I've done for want of wit
   C            G7    C
To memory now I can't recall.
   C                      G7
So fill to me the parting glass.
C         F    C      G        Am
Goodnight and joy be with you all.

Oh all the comrades that ere I had
Are sorry now I'm going away
And all the sweethearts that e're I had
Would wish me one more day to stay
But since it falls unto my lot
That I should rise and you should not
I'll gently rise and I'll softly call
Goodnight and joy be with you all.

(extra verse)

If I had money enough to spend
And leisure time to sit awhile
There is a fair maid in this town
That sorely has my heart beguiled
Her rosy cheeks and ruby lips
I own, she has my heart in thrall
Then till to me the parting glass
Good night and joy be with you all.
