Marc Sabatella's Jazz Improvisation Primer: Jazz Fundamentals

Jazz Fundamentals

Now that you are listening to jazz, you need to be more conscious of what
you are hearing. The most important aspects to which you should pay
attention are structure, swing, and creativity.

	Structure

Most jazz since the bebop era is based on a form that is actually quite
similar to the sonata allegro form from classical theory: an optional
introduction, the exposition or theme (possibly repeated), the development
section, and the recapitulation, possibly followed by a coda. The
introduction, if present, sets the tone for the piece; the exposition is
the main melody; the development section is where the composer extends the
ideas of the exposition; the recapitulation is a restatement of the theme;
and the coda is an ending. In jazz terms, these sections of a piece would
be called the the intro, the head (possibly repeated), the solo section,
the head out, and possibly a coda or tag ending. The intro establishes the
mood; the head is the main melody; the solo section is where the soloists
improvise on the melody and/or chord progression of the tune; the head out
is a restatement of the theme; and the coda or tag is an ending.

While not every piece follows this form, the vast majority of traditional
jazz stays very close to it. During the solo section, the rhythm section
generally keeps following the chord progression of the head while the
soloists take turns improvising. Each time through the progression is
called a chorus, and each soloist may take several choruses. In this
respect, the theme-and-variations form of classical music is also a valid
analogy. Each soloist plays an improvised variation on the theme.

The improvisation is the most important aspect of jazz, just as the
development is often considered the most important part of the classical
sonata. While listening to a piece, try to sing the theme to yourself
behind the solos. You may notice that some soloists, particularly
Thelonious Monk and Wayne Shorter, often base their solos on the melodic
theme as much as on the chord progression. You will also notice that
liberties are often taken with the theme itself; players such as Miles
Davis, Coleman Hawkins, Sonny Rollins, and John Coltrane were especially
adept at making personal statements even while just playing the head.

There are two very common forms for a head or theme in jazz. The first is
the blues form, which is normally a twelve bar form. There are many
variants on blues chord progressions, but most are based on the idea of
three four bar phrases. In its original form, the second phrase would be a
repeat of the first, and the third would be an answer to that phrase,
although this convention is rarely adhered to in jazz. You may wish to
check out the blues progressions
listed later to get an idea of what they sound like, so you can recognize
blues forms when you hear them. Liner notes and song titles will also
often help identify which tunes are based on the blues. Some well known
jazz tunes based on blues progressions include "Now's The Time" and
"Billie's Bounce" by Charlie Parker, "Straight, No Chaser" and "Blue Monk"
by Thelonious Monk, and "Freddie Freeloader" and "All Blues" by Miles
Davis.

The other common form in jazz is the AABA song form, used extensively in
popular music from the turn of the century until the dawn of rock and roll.
This form consists two sections, called the verse or A-section and the
bridge. The form is verse 1, verse 2, bridge, verse 3. The verses are
similar or identical except for the lyrics and perhaps the last two bars.
The song "I Got Rhythm" by George Gershwin, is one example of an AABA form.
There are literally hundreds of tunes based on the chord progression to that
tune, including "Anthropology" by Charlie Parker and "Oleo" by Sonny
Rollins. Other songs with the AABA form include "Darn That Dream" by Jimmy
Van Heusen, and "There Is No Greater Love" by Isham Jones. Songs such as
these, popular songs from the first half of the century that have been
interpreted by many jazz musicians, are often called standards.

These structures are only guidelines. Musicians such as Cecil Taylor
showed us long ago that it is possible to express oneself without such well
defined structures, and indeed this type of expression is often more
personal that any more organized form. I have described these common
structures to help you understand the context in which many musicians work,
not to suggest that they are the only way. You should learn to discern for
yourself when listening to other musicians what type of structures they are
using, if any. You should also decide for yourself which structures to use
in your own playing.

	Swing

Understanding the structure of the music is the first step toward an
increased appreciation of it. The rest of this primer will deal mainly
with hands-on musical examples. Before you delve into the theory, however,
you need to develop a feel for swing. This is part of the rationale behind
doing so much listening, since it is virtually impossible to teach swing
analytically. Nonetheless, I will try to explain what you should be
hearing and trying to achieve in your own playing.


	Definition

The most basic element of swing is the swing eighth note. In classical
music, a set of eighth notes in 4/4 time are meant to take exactly one half
of a beat each. This style is called straight eighth notes. Play a C
major scale "C, D, E, F, G, A, B, C" in straight eighth notes. If you have
a metronome, set it to 96 beats per minute. Those are quarter notes, "one,
two, three, four". Subdivide this in your mind, "one and two and three and
four and".

A common approximation to swing eighth notes uses triplets. The basic
beats are be subdivided in your mind as "one-and-uh two-and-uh three-and-uh
four-and-uh", and you play only on the beat and on the "uh". The first
note of every beat will be twice as long as the second. This will sound
like Morse Code dash-dot-dash-dot-dash-dot-dash-dot and is far too
exaggerated for most jazz purposes. Somewhere in between straight eighth
notes (1:1 ratio between first and second note) and triplets (2:1 ratio)
lie true swing eighth notes. I cannot give an exact ratio, however,
because it varies depending on the tempo and the style of the piece. In
general, the faster the tempo, the straighter the eighth notes. Also,
pre-bebop era players often use a more exaggerated swing than later
performers, even at the same tempo. No matter what the ratio, the second
"half" of each beat is usually accented, and beats two and four are usually
accented as well. Again, the amount of accent depends on the player and
the situation.

There is also the issue of playing behind or ahead of the beat. When
Dexter Gordon plays, even the notes that should fall on the beat are
usually played a little bit late. This is often called laying back. It
can lend a more relaxed feel to the music, whereas playing notes that
should fall on the beat a little bit early can have the opposite effect.
Bassists often play slightly ahead of the beat, particularly at faster
tempos, to keep the music driving forward.

Not all styles of jazz use swing in the same way. Most Latin jazz
styles and many fusion and modern styles use straight eighths, or eighth
notes that are only slightly swung. Shuffles and some other rock styles
use very exaggerated swing. Listen closely to recordings in different
styles, paying attention to the differences. Do not be fooled into
thinking that swing is a universal constant.

	Practicing Swing

Learning to play natural sounding swing eighth notes is often the hardest 
part of learning to play jazz, since it can sound so bad until you
can do it well. There are some techniques that can help you overcome
this initial awkward stage.

If you have been listening carefully to other musicians, you may be better
at recognizing swing than at playing it. Therefore, I highly recommend
recording yourself playing swing eighth notes at various tempos, and then
listening to yourself on tape. You can judge for yourself whether your
swing sounds natural or forced. It has been said that if you cannot swing
unaccompanied, you cannot swing. It is important to work on your own
concept of swing in this way so that your perception of how you sound is
not influenced by the sound of your accompanists.

You should work on your swing no matter what you are playing. When you
practice scales, work on swing as well as simply playing the right notes.
Try varying the rhythm you use to play the scale. In addition to scales,
you should try practicing swing when playing other exercises or songs. Any
practice method book or fakebook will probably contain several appropriate
pieces. Try playing songs with many consecutive eighth notes, but also try
songs with longer notes and rests. Having to play many consecutive eighth
notes can make you too self-conscious of your swing.

While being able to swing unaccompanied is important, it is not easy to do
at first, and when developing your swing concept, it can also help to hear
it occasionally in the context of a group performance. One thing that
would help at times is to have a rhythm section accompaniment. If you have
Band-In-A-Box, you can program it to play endless choruses of C major, and
then you can practice playing or improvising on your C major scale while
working on your swing. Aebersold records can provide accompaniment as
well, but be aware that most of the tunes have many chord changes and are
too complex to use for this purpose. There are a few suitable tracks,
however, such as some of those on Volumes 1, 16, 21, 24, and 54, which are
geared toward beginners. The books included with these, especially the
first four, also contain some useful instructional material.

If you have a partner, or a tape recorder, or a sequencer (computer
hardware and/or software to record and play back on a synthesizer) you can
create do-it-yourself accompaniment. The basic components of a swing drum
beat are the ride pattern and the hi-hat pattern. The ride cymbal pattern,
at its most basic, is "1, 2 and, 3, 4 and"; or, phonetically, "ding ding-a
ding ding-a". The eighth notes on 2 and 4 should be swung, of course. The
hi-hat is closed (with the foot pedal) on 2 and 4. Walking bass lines can
be constructed by following a few simple rules. First, play quarter notes.
Second, keep them in the two octaves below middle C. Third, play only
notes from the scale on which you are working. Fourth, most notes should
be only a step away from the previous note, although occasional leaps are
acceptable. For instance, a C major bass line might consist of "C, D, E,
F, G, E, F, G, A, B, A, G, F, E, D, B, C". You will need a lot of patience
to create your own accompaniment with a tape recorder, since you will want
to record many measures so you do not have to keep rewinding the tape when
improvising later. A sequencer will allow you to set up loops, so you can
record only a few measures and have them repeat endlessly.

	Creativity

The most important aspect of improvisation is creativity. This is the most
vital concept for an improviser to understand. The goal is to hear
something interesting in your head and be able to play it immediately.
Your understanding of music fundamentals is one ally in this endeavor. It
can help you interpret the sounds you hear in your head by relating them to
sounds you know and understand. Your technical proficiency on your
instrument is another ally. It can help you accurately execute what you
conceive. Inspiration, however, is what enables you to hear interesting
ideas to begin with. That creative spark is what distinguishes the true
artist from the mere craftsman. While no primer can show you how to be
creative, I can try to shed a little light on creativity as it pertains to
improvisation.


	The Creative Process

Trumpet player Clark Terry summarizes the creative process as "imitate,
assimilate, innovate". Listening to other musicians can give you ideas you
may wish to develop further, and being able to successfully duplicate what
they are doing is one step toward being able to express yourself. Next,
you must understand why the things you are playing sound the way they do,
so that when you want to create a particular sound, you will know how to
achieve it. The theory presented in the following sections can help you
structure your thoughts, and can also help you identify the sounds you
hear. However, analytic processes are an aid to the creative process, not
a replacement for it. Two analogies, one with language and one with
mathematics, should help make this clear.

When you began to speak, you learned at first by listening to others and
imitating them. Gradually, you became aware of grammar, and eventually the
grammar was codified for you in English classes. Your vocabulary has
probably been growing ever since you spoke your first word. In both
writing and conversation, your tools are your knowledge of grammar,
vocabulary, and appropriate subject matter. To write or say anything
interesting, however, you must have a certain amount of inspiration. It is
not sufficient to merely string together grammatically correct phrases of
words. What you have to say is generally more important than how you say
it, although proper use of the language can help to get your point across.
Similarly, in music, knowledge of theory and fundamentals are the tools of
composition and improvisation, but inspiration plays the most important
role in determining your success. It is not enough to merely play the
"right" notes; you must also play interesting music. Jazz improvisation is
often likened to "telling a story", and, like a good story, should be well
structured and also convey something interesting to the listener.

In mathematics, creativity can often be crucial as well. Learning the
various axioms, formulas, and equations normally does not tell you how to
solve a particular word problem, integrate a certain function, or prove a
new theorem. Some ingenuity is required to be able to apply your knowledge
to the problem at hand. Often, knowing how similar problems have been
solved in the past can give you an idea of where to start, and experience
working with a particular type of problem can help direct you. In all but
the simplest of math problems, however, some original thinking is required.
Similarly, in jazz, your familiarity with the works of other musicians can
help you get started, and your knowledge of theory can help direct you, but
in order to be a successful improviser, you will need to be creative. Just
as long columns of numbers are not particularly interesting, even if they
add up correctly, neither is an improvisation that consists of nothing but
scales and patterns based on those scales.

Your listening experience, your knowledge of music theory, and
experimentation on your instrument will define the musical context in which
you are able to express yourself. You should continually strive to expand
that context by listening to many different musicians, analyzing what you
hear, and practicing as much as possible. Still, the final ingredient, the
inspiration, you will have to find on your own.

	Playing

You should by now, if you have not already, be starting to improvise. You
should start the same way you began to practice swing: alone and
unaccompanied at first, with a tape recorder if possible, and then with
some sort of rhythm section accompaniment. Again, Band-In-A-Box, Aebersold
records, or do-it-yourself accompaniment will be invaluable.

For your first attempts at improvisation, pick a key with which you are
comfortable and then start to play whatever comes into your head. Invent
little melodies that use mainly notes from the selected scale. Do not try
to fill all available space with notes. Instead, concentrate on hearing a
short phrase in your head, and then try to play that phrase. Do not worry
if this means there are breaks of several seconds or more between phrases.
Miles Davis used this style of phrasing all the time.

At some point while improvising in a given key, try playing notes that are
not in that key. Playing notes that are not in the current key is
sometimes called playing outside. You will find that in many cases, it
sounds very natural, while in other cases, it sounds dissonant, or harsh.
The later sections on theory may help you understand why this is so, but
your ear is the ultimate judge. When you finally run out of ideas in one
key, you may wish to switch to another. You may also wish to try
improvising without any key center at all. I believe this should be just
as natural as improvising within a key.

Transcribing solos played by other musicians is one way to get some ideas
of what to play. You can examine the structure of the solo, see how they
use the various chord/scale relationships discussed later in this primer,
and try to apply what you learn to your own playing. One of the best solos
for a beginner to study is Miles Davis' solo on "So What" from the album
Kind Of Blue. The chord structure is simple: sixteen bars of D minor,
followed by 8 bars of Eb minor, and then 8 bars of D minor again. Miles'
lines are easy enough to transcribe note for note. The theory sections
below will help you understand the framework in which Miles was working,
but transcribing his solo will help you see what he was doing within that
framework.

Another way to get ideas for soloing is by using patterns, or short phrases
that you have practiced beforehand and know will fit the chord changes at a
particular point. In general, improvising is much more than simply
stringing together patterns, but pattern practicing can be a good way to
develop your technique as well as your ear, particularly if you practice
your patterns in all twelve keys. There are several books, including Jerry
Coker's Patterns For Jazz, that give some useful patterns.

A technique used often in the bebop era and since is quoting, or using a
recognizable phrase from another composition or well-known recorded
improvisation as part of one's own improvisation. This is also sometimes
called interpolation. You may have noticed this taking place in solos you
have heard. There is usually some humor value in quoting, particularly if
the interpolated work is something silly like "Pop Goes The Weasel".

The most important obstacles for a beginning improviser to overcome are his
or her own inhibitions. At first, when practicing improvisation by
yourself, you may feel you have no idea what to play. Once you have
reached the point where you feel comfortable in the practice room and
decide it is time to play with other musicians, you may feel self-conscious
about playing in front of your peers. Finally, when you can play with
other musicians in private, you may feel nervous when you first perform in
public. I have no miracle cures for these problems. I can only suggest
you play as much as possible at each stage, and continually push yourself
to take chances.
