Musical Modes

There's always lots of confusion over how the various modes
in music work.  It's really quite simple, and I'll try to explain how
I understand it here.  Note that I play guitar and although the information is
general musical theory, it is aimed primarily at guitarists.

There are seven modes, corresponding directly to the seven degrees in
a major scale.  In C major, the seven notes are C, D, E, F, G, A and B.
Each of these notes can be used to construct a different scale.  The first,
Ionian is just the C major scale we started with.  By
taking the same notes, but starting from D instead of C and ending on C
instead of B, we have constructed a new scale, D Dorian.
We can start at any note and play the notes from the C major scale in
order; each is a different mode:

C Ionian
C D E F G A B
     ^       ^
D Dorian
D E F G A B C
     ^     ^  
E Phrygian
E F G A B C D
 ^       ^
F Lydian
F G A B C D E
       ^     ^
G Mixolydian
G A B C D E F
     ^     ^
A Aeolian
A B C D E F G
   ^     ^
B Locrian
B C D E F G A
 ^     ^
All these scales contain the same notes, but they are different modes
of different keys.  They are all relative scales.
Note that you may already be familiar with A Aeolian - it's the common
A minor scale. 

This method of deriving scales is particularly useful for
improvising (on guitar at least).  If, say, you decide you want to
play in G Mixolydian, you just use the notes from C major (ionian)
which you should know already, and change the degrees so that 1 is G,
2 is A etc up to 7 being F.  Simple! 

The above method derives relative scales in different keys, 
containing the same notes.  What if you want to find all the scales
in the same key ?  There's another, harder but more general
method for working out scales.  Fortunately we can derive this new
method from the simple method already known. 

Look at the table
above.  The D Dorian scale consists of D, E, F, G, A, B and C.  We
know already that the D major scale is D, E, F#, G, A, B, C#.  By
comparing these scales, we can see that D Dorian is the same as D Ionian
but with two notes flattened: the 3rd degree F# and 7th degree C# of the
ionian scale become
F and C in the dorian scale.  This rule holds for all keys, and any
dorian scale can be worked out by flattening the 3rd and 7th degrees
of the ionian, or major scale. 
Lost ?  Here's a table to help:

Scale
1234567


D Major
DEF#GABC#


D Dorian
DEFGABC

The 3rd note and the 7th note are sharp in the major scale and natural
in the dorian scale. 

We can apply the same technique to any of the other five scales in the
first table above.  Want to know how to derive a Mixolydian scale ?
G ionian is G, A, B, C, D, E and F#, but G Mixolydian is just G, A, B,
C, D, E and F.  Thus mixolydian is the same as ionian but with a flattened
7th. 

By repeating the above process for all seven modes, any mode can be
derived from the ionian (or major) scale by applying the following
modifications:

Scale
1234567


Ionian
-------


Dorian
--b---b


Phrygian
-bb--bb


Lydian
---#---


Mixolydian
------b


Aeolian
--b--bb


Locrian
-bb-bbb

Now, if you ask "What's E locrian ?" you can take E major (E, F#,
G#, A, B, C#, D#) and flatten the 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th and 7th degrees to
get the E locrian scale of E, F, G, A, Bb, C, D.  "What's Ab Lydian ?"
Ab Major is Ab, Bb, C, Db, Eb, F, G; we sharpen the 4th degree for lydian
so Ab Lydian is Ab, Bb, C, D, Eb, F, G. 

I've just scratched the surface here, as these are just the seven major
modes.  There are also melodic minor modes, harmonic minor modes, and many
other types of scale.  The method for deriving each scale is identical,
however.  To derive harmonic minor scales repeat the above process starting
with the A harmonic minor scale A, B, C, D, E, F, G#.  From there, derive
that B dorian harmonic minor is B, C, D, E, F, G#, A and repeat the whole
process. 

I hope this helps you understand the theory behind musical modes, and that
you can now apply this information to work out just about any scale you like.
I will appreciate any comments anyone has on this article - feel free to email
me at the address below. 

Happy playing!
