BT LORE (Continued) 

What is there to make fun of about Brendan? 

Not much really. This website has learned he is reported to have stumbled once. 

Why is Brendan so serious anyway? 

Brendan Hill's serious nature has long been a foundation in the success of BT. Sage and wise beyond his years, he keeps his more audacious counterparts from falling on their faces as exemplified by his steady backbeat. As a young boy growing up in London, Brendan was fond of reading. He was reported by his parents to have read at least 7 books a day before the age of 5. On discovering a mail-order entry form he applied to the C of E National Seminary before he was 6. On being rejected he forged his legal degree as a barrister and in a groundbreaking legal battle he made gains for young people all over England. It wasn't until the Archbishop of Canterbury himself rejected Brendan in person that Brendan finally accepted his decision. Being very career minded, on moving to the U.S. he applied for a degree in accountancy at the age of 7. But because of the well-meaning yet misguided child labor laws, he was forced to defer for at least 11 years. Being unable to wait that long, Brendan had felt that his contribution to society required more immediacy. After much consideration and two books about his exploits later, one rating Number 20 on the topseller list, Brendan was well on his way to becoming a tax adjuster at 9 1/2. Here he met his first love Doris. But her family would not approve of young Brendan fearing the age difference of 25 years would not only ruin her chances of gaining her law degree, but could possibly get her arrested. Though the romance failed, Brendan's love of law had become revitalized and dress codes throughout the country were abolished. There is also a very famous case involving the San Diego "weedwacker massacre" in which Brendan's policies were quoted no less than 4 times. Confident that he had put some of the injustices of his day to right, Brendan sought to build a home for himself. He had been steadily investing his part-time job money in lucrative real estate around the country. He selected a beautiful 160 acre property in Southampton. He was often seen wandering the beach with a Dictaphone making notes for what would become his blackest opera. Receiving mixed reviews the following year, it only played 10 times and financially "Just 14" folded a failure. At this point he started smoking cigarettes. Since he was not of an age to buy cigarettes on his own, he began "hanging out" with the bad sort of smoking crowd. It was here he met John Popper and things started to slip. Once rock and roll had become his passion the ruination of his fortunes and holdings were ultimately assured. Though the recent commercial success of BT would give him cause to feel heartened, he was reported to have been only resigned to his destiny until very recently. He now can be seen staring out of his dwelling in Seattle, phase one of his return to power complete. He plans a marriage next year and there are mummerings on the Senate floor in Washington of a possible run for office. But this website has learned through secret informants that such a bid a for office is unlikely as Brendan has been all this time since the fiasco on Broadway, planning steadily, slowly, a rise to power that is far more sinister and vastly far more reaching than any legitimate office could afford him. Sean D'Eaudoit, 23, of Salem, Washington runs a small struggling construction firm. He claims to have been involved in the construction of an airfield, a bunker and what can only be called a massive Biosphere/vault. He cannot comment further as apparently Brendan has been using different construction firms at different times providing only partial blueprints at a time. Blueprints that he himself has drawn by hand. In a shakeup last week, Bill Gates CEO of Microsoft, has announced a new junior partner to come in and "straighten out some things". This new partner has chosen to remain nameless but insiders say he likes to play the drums. Was Brendan's move to Seattle a casual decision? Or deliberate? This website can only suggest that he be watched and that investment in Microsoft is now more than ever a sound one. 

Who are BT's past bass players? 

Under the name Blues Traveler in 1987, there have only been four musicians in the band. However, the change of name from Blues Band was punctuated by this fact. This can be no truer than in bass players. To truly get insight into the origins of the band we must go back to 1983. Brendan Hill had invited his high school band mate John Popper to his house to play. Among the musicians there was Brendan's older brother Sebastian Hill. Sebastian would go on to do much video work with the band but his bass playing days ended on graduating from high school in 1985. Bass players were hard to come by and during his brief stint in the band Chris Gross, later to become Chris Barron of the Spin Doctors, suggested to John the possibility of his best friend Ben's sister Felicia. Felicia Lewis was a novice at the bass but was keen to try. The band could ask for no more. As time wore on, it was very apparent to all involved including Felicia, that the other band members meant to do this for a living and she did not. By 1987 there had been many rumors circulating around the small high school that Felicia had already been fired and Bob Sheehan, King of the Deadheads, had been replacing her. No one knows where these rumors stemmed from but Bob Sheehan kept showing up for rehearsals. Before anyone knew what had happened, he'd already been in the band for several months. Unable to fire Felicia, it would be Felicia herself who would "retire" for the sake of her friends. And so it stands today. 

Who are BT's past guitar players? 

In the early days of Blues Band, soon to be Blues Traveler, the hardest thing to find was a capable guitar player. From the very first session as The Establishment, the nucleus of Blues Band had fair to midland guitar players. Levi Pervin was the first of these in 1983. But to his credit all of the other band members were reported to have sucked as well. Future gigs with him would be impossible, Levi was summarily fired. Now began what the band members who remember refer to as "the dark days" in terms of guitar. The only available kid with a guitar was an uncomfortable little lad named David Stern. He didn't play very well. He was a pained person to know, but he was willing to take instruction as well as abuse. In time the band learned to play around him, giving him simple parts to play. It wasn't long before the band could function and play school dances, but Stern's attitude has worsened. In retrospect it could be argued that he simply had had enough. Enter Ted Irenas. Ted had graduated high school in '84 but was thrown out of college for nefarious activities. He had spent some time in a mental institution. It was Ted who used to play guitar with John before leaving high school. He was a great musician. Ted in fact was the one who had introduced John to Chris. John's musical growth and Chris' for that matter, stemmed largely from Ted. However at this point, though Ted would be brilliant at times, he didn't remain consistent and there would be times where he just would not want to play. He left the band for vague reasons of his own, which would suggest that he just wasn't ready. John went to work looking through the high school for a guitarist. Blues Band was known around school which made it easy for John to set up auditions. His prime candidate was a freshman name Troy Strazhiem. While auditioning Troy, a tall football-player type came into the practice room and started messing around with Troy and John on guitar as well. He clearly had musical taste among his scattered chops and while being more musical that Troy, was fairly frightening to John because he looked sort of tough. John went with the safer call and Troy was in the band. After one gig in which Troy left on the shoulders of his fellow freshmen, leaving the other band members to get the gear home, it was apparent that he'd had too much too fast. Aside from this he could not play guitar a solo without drooling incessantly which may sound bizarre but is actually a common condition. At Brendan's and then bass player Felicia's insistence, John called the large football player on the phone. His name was Chan Kinchla and he was not nearly as scary once you got to know him. At least eventually. 

Who are BT's past drummers? 

For the most part, there has never been another drummer besides Brendan Hill. This is certainly true in terms of long commitment. There are however, two occasions when Brendan was unable to play. These were gigs that could not be canceled and the reason for his absence was because, on being thrown out of his college dorm for drinking beer, he got so angry he put his fist through a wall, shattering his wrist. The substitute drummer was another high school friend from Princeton by the name of Mike Kinsey. On other occasions Kinsey would act as a second drummer at parties. He was a very close emulation of Neil Peart and pursued a career of his own in a metal band out in California for several years. He remains a good friend. 

Who was the original harmonica player? 

In the 12th Century B.C. the Emperor of China had his court musicians invent for him what would be called the sheng. This resembled a large gonja bowl with pipe-organ like pipes exuding from it. Covering a particular hole would send air through the shengs' "free-floating" reeds. This was the first free-reeded instrument in existence. It wasn't until the 1800s when H.M. Hohner constructed the first modern harmonica. He had borrowed the free-floating reeds concept not directly from the sheng of ancient China, but from squeezeboxes and accordions more current in his time. The term "free-reeds" pertains to the way the harmonicas reeds vibrate. Slits in a comb of a harmonica force air to pass around reeds that float suspended by a pin causing vibrations and ultimately tone and sound. As opposed to "fixed" reeds such as saxophones or clarinets where the reed is attached at a point where the mouth gently squeezes as it blows to force air through it. A sort of distant cousin of "free-reeded" instruments are the "double-reeded" instruments such as bassoons and oboes. Here the air passes through two reeds which are more independent of what the lips are doing, however they do require a very subtle touch. With a "free-reeded" instrument the embrasure is more pertinent to tone rather than actual sound. So therein lies the debate - was H.M. Hohner the first harmonica player in 1824? Arguably, but this website feels that in a real sense it was the grand old emperor of China circa 1200 B.C. 

What is the name BT and how did it come to be? 

The name Blues Traveler is derivative of several key fragments of the members psyche. The name Blues Band was a stoically simple name designed to define the band's intentions. They were trying to play blues and it seemed no-nonsense to them. The fact that it didn't really sound much like what most would consider blues didn't concern them too much because the attempt was real enough. Then when confronted by having to make it in a commercial market the name Blues Band was reviled by anyone who would hire them as generic and unimaginative. At the time Chan Kinchla said that when the band jammed properly it was "as if we were creating a fifth entity". Thus came the concept of naming the band after that entity. Blues Entity sounded outright strange, even unforgiving. The thought of going to hear a band called Blues Entity would bring visions of proctological examination to most listeners or at least this was the feeling the band had. A few years earlier the movie "Ghost Busters" had come and gone. It was now being shown on cable at this time. During one scene the villain ghost, "Gozer The Traveler", had unleashed its evil power. There is a very clear moment when you see a darkened Manhattan skyline where echoes a thunderous voice "The Traveler has come". This struck John as a revelation. He was very stoned at the time and suggested to his brethren - why not call it Blues Traveler? He was sort of kidding, but immediately the band thought it cool. It is an eccentric little name and has served the band well ever since. It does serve quite a unique purpose musically. For those who come to see the band, having no knowledge of them, expect to see traditional blues played. The presence of the harmonica lends itself to this setup. Because what they do hear, though original rock and roll, and hardly traditional at all, is played with the same honesty that traditional blues was played with. And that connection comes across. This is a very intentional purpose to the name and the reason the word "Blues" was always kept. 

Were there any additional musicians in BT, and if so, who the hell were they, and don't hold out on me dammit! 

Okay, Okay, calm down. This website wouldn't dream of holding out on you. Now please, just relax for a second and let go of this website's collar. You're messing up its Versace suit. After 1987 BT had very temporary, fleeting attempts at horn players. There was an alto player Jason St. Pierre who did one gig with them. Their first gig on December 3rd 1987 at the Wonderland Blues Bar. After collectively ripping off more than $300 from his friends, including the band, he left town and was never heard from again. The assumption was Mexico and a new life. The other horn player was a gentleman by the name of Dave Masucci who helps front the popular band The Authority. At the time he was experimenting with various concoctions of alcohol and when called by John to discuss why he was not at rehearsal one day, John remembers his response: "Hey man, I'm drunk". This was not an auspicious beginning. And BT took its hard luck with horns as a sign. Chris Barron was in the group on and off in those early days playing in between the band's sets at Nightingales and doing the occasional number with the band. Outside of that, this website has no data of meaningful membership by anyone else. 

Who has sat in with BT? Or is it sitted in? 

This website on in-depth research, cannot conclusively determine either way, but is leaning towards "sat". As for the musicians who have sat in with the band, as complete a list as we can come up with follows: 

(pending) 

What is the Wobbling Surfer and how do I do it? 

One of the earliest songs BT has ever written is a song called And So It Goes, a meaningful diatribe in which a pre-adolescent Popper proclaims to the world that basically he's seen it all. It is hysterical to hear early versions of this song when he speaks of his world weariness even though his voice hasn't completely changed. The song has taken on new meaning in recent years as the band actually is starting to earn some of that ire. The song also has come to signify an end of tour ceremony amongst the band and crew. Towards the end of the song the entire stage crew emerges in nothing but their underwear. This alone is an awesome feat in that for many of the crew, it is the first time the entire tour they have worn undergarments. Many have been the desperate searches for a pair they could borrow. And underwear sharing would create a potential health risk. But shots for hepatitis made possible the continuance this tradition. Once out on stage the crew helps John demonstrate a particular dance to the crowd. The dance involves standing sideways while looking straight ahead, arms out a comfortable distance from rest of body, while still remaining attached at the armpit. The lower lumble sacal angle continues to support the upper torso with knees slightly bent. Then the potential dancer (he is not kinetic yet) is asked to imagine himself on a surfboard somewhere deep in the Mediterranean Sea. There are sharks around him and ahead of him a hostile Iraqi force has a blockade in place. As if this weren't bad enough, his only means of propulsion is to wobble his way to shore. Then after a brief counting period the audience is asked to facilitate such an experience through interpretive dance. For those who are feeling slightly more randy, a mid-air jump can be added for additional thrills and enhancement. The effect causes a sensation of a strange and singular unity and may be used to impress others. This dance has played a major role in negotiative training at Yale Business School, and at the 1994 and 1995 model U.N.s. It is the band's, as well as this website's hope that future negotiators of world politics may put its benefits to practice. 

What's the deal with that ending on Sweet Talking Hippie? 

Sweet Talking Hippie has been a mainstay in BT's repertoire. The lyrics inspire images of one who has given himself entirely to the groove. The song centers around this groove and is intentionally left loose and free to flow where it will. At the end of the song Popper starts to take the groove over and reduce it to its simplest form. This can manifest itself in his breathing alone, but sometimes the band can add subtleties. In any event there comes a point when the groove has been so trimmed to its bare essence that it almost completely exists in idea only. This is directly from the lesson taught to the band in their early days in the New School For Social Research. At an early class taught by Arnie Lawrence and Chico Hamilton, the entire room filled with music students on establishing a solid groove, is asked to freeze and wait in silence. If done right, the groove hangs in the air, effortlessly in the hearts and minds, and even physical realm of all there. Then at an instant's notice, at any point, everyone can continue to jam as if it had not stopped at all. For in a real sense it hadn't. Attempting this in front of thousands of audience members has been achieved many times, but there is an added dimension. The crowd being so huge can actually change the groove without time being kept. This is because the ratio of distance is far greater than in an intimate setting. A beat that is heard at the stage takes a few seconds to reach someone in the back of the room. This can create a gap of rhythm that can devour itself. The band has developed the ability to keep the connections and welcome in the new input. There are no mistakes when the groove changes as long as you keep the stream of conscious pure. Obviously the band will never "finish" perfecting this art form but it is a fun palette to work with provided the conditions allow. The effect of the band returning the groove to its original state, if done properly creates quite a stunning effect as well. 

Have there ever been any guest writers or lyric or music? 

This website had obtained to this date two examples of writers of lyrics who are outside of the band. One writer Shulie Cowen assisted John on the bridge of an obscure song called Dream On. Another more popular song Love Of My Life was mostly written by old girlfriend of Bob's from high school. Her name is Stephanie Samaroo. This website has also learned that the entire words to New York Prophesie was a collaboration by John Popper with his father Robert. This has caused considerable stress at the Popper ancestral home. Mr. Popper is said to walk around the house quoting new lyrics and since he speaks seven languages only a small percentage are easily understandable. Neighbors have been concerned for some time. But at present the situation has quieted down. 

What does it all mean? 

This is a question that has plagued mankind since before the dark days of Pearl Harbor. In fact before man was actually called anything remotely humanoid, and the first Australopithecus climbed down from the tree to get that thing he dropped, the question of what it all means has existed. Arguably the question of meaning, being assigned to existence, has probably existed before there was any life at all to ponder. Using the "tree falls and no one hears it" theory, one could ask what is required for a question itself to exist? This website has studied the question closely using its 500 member research staff carefully placed throughout the best learning facilities and information centers around the world. We have studied all of the prophets and philosophers. We have studied the rantings of madmen, careful to ascertain if any of their babbling made any sense and went unnoticed in the shadow of their atrocities. We have conclusively studied all of the satirists from Snoopy's casual take on life contrasting Charlie Brown's day to day worries, to Jean Paul Satre's eternal question. Dante was examined from either side and it was found in his case that there could be no one point gained without a counterpoint. Schuman was studied as well as DeDeur, Ta Woo Tsien was introduced and as expected, tended to override and cancel out the very relative contributions, causing his neutralization as well. From Flobert to Kafka, to Steve Bocchco to L. Ron Hubbard and DeForrest Kelly, every aspect of human endeavor has been explored and after five years of preparation on this single subject alone, this website has come to the conclusion that it basically has to do with scamming chicks. 

Why doesn't BT do Fledgling or All In The Groove anymore live? 

All of the songs mentioned have one problem. They have been written and recorded in keys much too high for John to be able to sing them on a regular basis. John is reported to feel terrible about this, but the last attempt to do Onslaught almost resulted in canceling gigs. John is a high tenor who tours an average of 8 months a year around cigarette smoke. His facility on singing piercingly high alto range songs has become inconsistent over time. This is a natural occurrence, a good example being any of your favorite sports figures being unable to move as quickly as they did early in their career. The band feels proud that least these songs were recorded and exist. Attempts to try them in different keys is always being explored but as yet, has been unsuccessful. 

Is it true John got a new dog? 

It is in fact true John and for all practical purposes BT, has a new addition to the road, John's Australian Cattle Dog (like the one in the "Road Warrior"). Her name is Cice. This name is short for Cicelle, a Magyar she-warrior who saved her master from the Mongol hordes. John felt this appropriate. She is 4 months old at this point, incredibly smart and terribly tenacious. According to John, she has learned to constantly alter the thermostat in an attempt to drive him insane. Nothing is ever where he left it, and at one point he was called by the local police to come pick his car up. It had been driven into a supermarket and abandoned. Witnesses identify a description fitting someone one foot high, running on all fours. No positive I.D.s were made however. John also notices the food tasting different and having a constant, listless dizzy feeling. He fears that Cice is trying to drug him. An attempt to further investigate this was halted in its tracks when Cice would not allow John to come to the phone. She claimed only that she was a dog, could not mastermind such an elaborate rouse and not to call anymore. She then scratched herself and hung up. It would seem strange as well that according to bank statements John is apparently signing all of his power of attorney over to Cice, again he can't be reached for comment. According to dog experts, Australian Cattle Dogs are often referred to as too smart for their own good. In a related story, just after making this statement, this dog expert is in intensive care, his brakes failed him on the way home. While writing this report, this website has received a wedding invitation, apparently Cice and John plan to tie the knot. 

What does Trina Magna mean? 

Trina Magna is Latin for "The Big Three". This was John Popper's attempt to approach the holy trinity from a philosophical standpoint. He paints a picture of the Father representing all knowledge that exists. The Son comes to represent change that occurs in those traditions with each new generation. The Holy Spirit is depicted as life itself, the very earnest attempt by the first two at their tasks. Therefore, the Father, Son, Holy Ghost are changed to Knowledge, Change and Life itself. John felt that an attempt to secularize a good idea shrouded with icons and religious factionalism could deliver a feeling of unity to any who wanted it. In his opinion, millenniums punctuated by Holy Wars of one form or another tend to get in the way of the core ideas of most of today's formal religions. "There are good ideas at the heart of any religion" he goes on, "since I'm a recovering Catholic I figured I should start exploring the religion I knew best". 

What's the deal with the cover of Four? 

It's green! Whoo Whoo! Waca Waca!.......Okay we'll tell you, please bear with us, this website has been up for a long time without sleep. This website hasn't been getting out as much as it needs to, it's feeling trapped and lonely and in a rut. It has tried jogging, videodating and EST, but nothing helps. It was feeling out of control this morning and pigged out on chocolate all day. The cramps have started so please bear with it. Anyway about the album cover...why are you asking this question???? This website means "you know what it is, don't you?" Well let's assume that you don't. It's green, there's a cat. Sometimes he smokes, sometimes he doesn't, he's a casual smoker, and it depends which store he's hanging out at. Some have smoking policies, some don't. It's just another attempt by the Man to keep us all from smoking and god this website needs a cigarette and we're feeling a little green. So back off! 

What does John whisper at the end of The Good The Bad and The Ugly? 

As usual, the band has been coyly uncooperative on these kinds of subjects. So this website has been forced to go behind their backs and investigate. The most likely story of what John is whispering at the end of The Good The Bad and The Ugly is as follows: The song written by Chan, was named after one of his favorite movies. BT have long been fans of Sergio Leoni and the truth seems to be that John, also a fan of the Spaghetti Western, had committed to memory the entire dialogue of the final scene of the movie where the three characters have their showdown in the cemetery. If you listen carefully you can distinctly hear "blondie you're a no good son of a bitch". While this may seem unlikely to some, this website knows for a fact that John Popper is a legitimate speed talker and is inclined to endorse this explanation. Other popular rumors vary from a secret love letter to some kind of code to manager Dave Frey's home phone number. But the band does take their music seriously and it would seem unlikely that they would go to such lengths for personal reasons or a gag. 





Are any band members married?

Chan & Serena Kinchla were married May 17th, 1997 in the Bahamas.
Brendan & Sophie Hill were married June 21st, 1997 in New York City.

Is Chan a Father?

We joyfully announce the birth of Chan & Serena’s son, Aydin Rojas Kinchla, December 24th, 1997, 8 pounds, 4 ounces at 4:24am, in Miami Florida.

What is GAAG? How do I sign up for it? Is this a mailing list/fan club?

Yes, Blues Traveler have a mailing list/fan club. It is also known as GAAG, which stands for Gigs At A Glance. It is a full color mailer full of Blues Traveler news, tour dates, merchandise page and fan related news. It is a free service to all fellow travelers. Below are ways to sign up: 

1) Send your name and address on a postcard, (postcards are best) to the following address: 



BLUES TRAVELER 
PO BOX 1128 
NEW YORK, NY. 10101 



2) At a Blues Traveler show go to the merchandise booth selling Blues Traveler T-shirts and look for the colored postcards. You can fill out a card and leave at the merchandise booth or take it home with you and fill your address and then stamp and mail to us. 

3) You can e-mail your postal mailing address to the e-mail link on our page. 

4) If you want to write to the band and are not receiving GAAG’s, be sure to let us know in your letter so we can add your name to the mailing list. Just print you address clearly on the outside of the envelope or at the end of your letter.

I’m a college student, which address should I use?

If you are a college student, try to leave a permanent address as well as your college address. Sometimes colleges don’t forward your new address to us and we have to delete your name when you leave school.

How to change your current address on the mailing list.

If you are moving or have moved don’t forget to keep us updated with your new address. Send a postcard that includes your “old address” as well as your “new address”. Some people have the same name and we won’t know who is changing their address without this information. If you send a letter, please write “ GAAG address change” on the outside of the envelope. Send all changes to: 



BLUES TRAVELER 
PO BOX 1128 
NEW YORK, NY. 10101 
Att: GAAG address change



Who has BT sat in with?

Check out Misha's page or the Greenones page 




------------------------------------------------------------------------


BT SIDE PROJECTS 


Wasabi 

Named after a hard-hitting Japanese spice, a spice that leaves no lasting scars, but still hitting with all the verocity of all your hotter numbers, Wasabi was formed in 1991 by Arnie Lawrence, Eric Schenkman, John Popper, Aaron Comess, Marc White and Rene Lopez of The Authority. The band's concept was basically to not rehearse, thus allowing BT members and Spin Doctors members as well as Authority members freedom to concentrate on their own bands, and at the same time providing a way to maximize every contributor's enthusiasm when approaching this lineup. Since there are no songs in Wasabi, every aspect is spontaneously created. No band member knows what key he will be in, what change will come, or what lyrics will be said, if any. The effect holds up surprisingly well. All these musicians have such a creative well to draw on, that they can keep the audience entertained for at least 7 hours. In the 8th hour the effects of this experiment begin to take their toll and without fail, attending a Wasabi show for longer than 9 hours can enrage an audience member, even insight him to violence out of sheer disgust. Fortunately, a 9-10 hour Wasabi show, while at the half-way point, fills the listener with hope and possibility, ends up (in the 9th hour that is) instilling a deep feeling of hopelessness in the listener. Combined with the violent tendencies previously mentioned, a listener to a Wasabi show who overdoses is by the 9th hour is automatically compelled to a half-assed semi-violent "what's the point" kind of troublemaker. The kind of mediocre, pissed-off drunk who runs into a church full of people to shed his clothing and defecate, but decides that they're not worth it on entering. This mediocrity can be heightened depending on consumption of alcohol or drug intake. Needless to say, no Wasabi show was legally allowed to exceed 6 1/2 hours where the maximum benefits could be properly utilized. In small doses there was much fun to be had. 

Ritz Power Jam 

A one-time musical collaboration created by Walter Durcacz (formerly the booker at Wetlands). Walter began working the Ritz in the early 90s, at the newly retooled Ritz on 52nd Street. Walter, who had made many friends while at Wetlands, got Noel Redding formerly of the Jimi Hendrix Experience, together with Chuck Leavell (keyboard player of many Rolling Stones records and currently featured on BT's Four) together with Bernie Werell (formerly of Parliament Funkadelic) also on keyboards as well as Jaimo (from the Allman Brothers) on drums. Add to this John Popper and Warren Haynes on lead guitar. But it didn't stop there. Bernie brought several of the drummers from Parliament, Dave Matthews showed up as did Trey Anastasio and Mike Gordon from Phish who were playing across the street at Roseland. The resulting jam was spectacular, creative and may never be repeated again. Walter didn't last long as dark powers in NY conspired against him but the tape does exist and he can be proud of pulling that one off. 

Blues Doctors or Spinning Traveler 

Much can be said about the relationship between BT and the Spin Doctors. Many rumors abound and much hullabaloo has been made over the weird pupa-like state in a show involving the two bands . What this is really all about involves the truest singular connection between them and that is the musical one. Both bands having known eachother for so long as well as having mastered the art of segueing one song into the next had naturally taken the next logical step segueing into eachother. For example, the Spin Doctors will be playing Shinbone Alley, as the jam progresses, John Popper comes out and starts soloing and trading riffs with Mr. Schenkman. Then Chan Kinchla will come on stage as the jam starts to take on eclectic possibilities. Soon Bob Sheehan will comes out and trade bass tones with Marc White. As this is happening, Brendan Hill will start tinging and pinging Aaron Comess' cymbals. The key of this jam may shift at this point as needed, and at some point no one knows exactly where, Brendan is now sitting down and it is Aaron Comess who is tinging and pinging. Once he leaves, the groove is decidedly different, everyone's still going at full blast. As member of Spin Doctors leave the stage, it is becoming apparent that this jam is sounding more and more like But Anyway. Before you know it, BT finishes up But Anyway and are now well into their set. If you go to the bathroom, or even look down for a minute, you could miss it and many are the strange reports from fans who swear they were watching the Spin Doctors only realize they had been dancing to BT the whole time. This effect can cause not only disorientation, but a nervous, queasy feeling for those unprepared. A feeling that perhaps they aren't really who they were to begin with, but someone else entirely, and that they had been this person for most of their life, only now realizing that their parents had given birth to, and raised someone else. Be careful, when at these shows to accept who you actually are because you cannot sue yourself, though many have tried. It doesn't matter that much now because the bands have grown so differently from those special days that you probably can relax in relative comfort, confident that you weren't that guy standing next to you. Whether that is a good thing or a bad thing, is up to you. 

High Plains Drifter 

In the early days of the Nightengales scene in New York's fashionable East Village, there was a band that ruled unopposed every weekend, throngs of people would come and fill this tiny bar and dance to R&B standards as well as brilliantly written original tunes. This was Joey Miserable and the Worms and their legend lives on. In the mists of time, changes would inevitably occur, Joey Miserable played by Simon Chardeot would leave the band to pursue a small pre mid-life crisis. The Worms forged on competantly and the new frontman rhythm guitarist Jono Manson would now become an excellent lead. But troubles were not over. The man had finally come to town. Ed Koch in his infinite wisdom had begun to reinforce an old blue law - no establishment in New York, without a very hard to obtain cabaret license, shall have more than 3 people on stage playing music. This meant an indefinite hiatus for The Worms' fearsome horn section. Jono Manson would rally, turning The Worms temporarily into a trio called the Sweetones. It was at this point that BT came to town. Completely ignorant of the cabaret laws, they were unable to get gigs anyway. Confining their musical exploration to rehearsals, the occasional kegger back home in Princeton and jam night every Tuesday at the Wonderland blues bar. A major upheaval took place as musicians and club owners began to protest this ridiculous law and as BT started playing its first gigs, they did what everyone else did, saw to it that the bass player had an extra long cord and would sit at the bar and play. It wasn't long, however, until Ed Koch realizing his mistake only too late to save himself, repealed the law. Suddenly every bar was an opportunity. Every watering hole a launching point for all the new bands and now there was a flood of new bands in NYC. For BT's part, they had been at the Nightengales, the only bar that would not throw them bodily onto the street for playing this weird, new kind of music, and in that bar they rightfully and appropriately worshipped at the feet of Jono Manson. They studied his song craft and his musical mastery and most of all, they learned from him how to work a crowd. It wasn't long before all involved were fast friends. This also included incredible bands like the Surreal McCoys, the Blue Chieftans, The Five Chinese Brothers, Jonny Allen, the GGB Band, Joan Osborne Quartet and eventually the Spin Doctors. Gigs started spreading out to other bars like the Mondo Cane, then the Mondo Perso and the major opening occurred when the Wetlands came to be in February 1989. But it was always a treat when BT could open for Jono Manson. BT, the Spin Doctors and Joan Osborne felt like junior members of a glorious fraternity. Well it wasn't long before BT were the newly heralded kings of the Nightengales as Jono Manson who had been holding the bag for 10 years decided it was time for a change and moved to New Mexico. He would remain a steadfast friend, an older brother while in New York a new scene was exploding. After BT's initial success as a nationally touring band, and there was some time available, for band members to pursue some small side projects for fun, Chan and Bob who were fond of partying in Colorado, thought it would be cool to throw a band together to pay for vacation expenses as well as provide them with opportunities to jam with old friends. Jono. living only hours away from Colorado, was an obvious choice. And thus High Plains Drifter, a name chosen by Chan, who's a big fan of Leone films, was born. They would go on to back Jono in a more focused vision of his, recording an album for his new A&M debut. This is now called The Jono Manson Band "Almost Home". It is a great example of the songwriting style of Jono and he has also put together an incredible band out of Santa Fe. You will see Jono on various HORDE dates this year, and in years passed and future. He is a musical inspiration to many and gave BT the right kind of help at a time when they needed a hip older brother. 

Fruits & Vegetables 

Chan's Fruits & Vegetables is really a pseudonym for Blues Traveler. There was a time in the early 90s when BT was playing nationally and doing very well, but at home in NY the places they had always played - Wetlands, Nightengales, Mondo Perso- were becoming too small to hold the crowds that were coming to see them safely. The band, feeling very aware of the loyalty they owed to the these clubs, were determined to play them as long as they could. And the idea for a pseudonym was for a time the way to have gigs, drawing only people in the know. Mainly friends. The name itself comes from a day years earlier, when the lads were on their way to beg for some playing time at a blues bar's open mike night. On crossing the street, Chan was nearly run down by a large truck that said "Chan's Fruits & Vegetables" on the side. Somebody quick-thinkingly snapped a picture and since the photo existed, it made a great poster and in fact a great name to play under. Proudly, Chan would announce from the stage at Nightengales "Hi, I'm Chan, and these are my fruits and vegetables". No produce salesman could have put it better. 

Is This For Real? 

Is This For Real is the name originally given to a haphazardly thrown together band that Bob and Chan would later mold into High Plains Drifter. The original lineup consisted not only of them, but Craig Dreyer of the Worms and Dreyer Brothers fame, as well as Pete Kovochovich formerly of Kindered Spirit. The idea was to have a ball, jam all night and try their hand at singing a couple of tunes. On being well-received and realizing a demand, they put more thought into it and developed the High Plains Drifter. 

John Popper Solo Acoustic 

Several concerts have occurred, mostly at Wetlands in NYC, though one did occur and was taped from the Fox Theatre Boulder. A large part of John's writing repertoire stems from his functional capabilities on the guitar. When having nothing else to do, he would come and sing selections from the vast body of songs he'd concoct from the 5 chords he knew. Many of the songs performed would go on to become BT standards. Examples including Go Outside and Drive, Just Wait, 100 Years, Love of My Life. For practical purposes these gigs provided John with a proving ground. A way to test which songs were desirable enough for BT. One of the more memorable tunes was called Ain't That Life popularly known as the Space Shuttle Song. John wrote it in high school in 1986 in honor of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. The song proved so moving to his teachers that he received the remaining 7 credits he needed to pass English. The next year as a freshman at the New School for Social Research, having done no homework the entire semester, John used that song to con his way into passing freshman English and in fact sophomore English the next year. This is proof that education is a state of mind. Yeah rock and roll. 




------------------------------------------------------------------------




BT INSTRUMENTS 



John Popper/Harmonica, guitar, vocals:
Hohner Special 20 Harmonicas
Taylor acoustic guitars- 6&12 string
Hamer guitars- 6&12 string
D'Addario Strings
Mesa Boogie 4x12" guitar cabinets
Mesa Boogie Tri-Rectifier amplifiers
Mesa Boogie Tri-axis tube pre-amp
Shure SM 58 microphone (for harmonica)
Behringer 2 channel mic pre-amps
Goff Leslie
Eventide H3000 series Harmonizers
Alesis Reverbs
Digitech Delays
Audix OM5 for vocals 

Chan Kinchla/Guitar:
Modulus Guitars
Taylor acoustic guitars- 6&12 string
D'Addario Strings
Solodano-SLO 100 Super Lead Overdrive amplifiers
Mesa Boogie Revolver
Mesa Boogie 4x12" guitar speaker cabinets
Korg DT-1 Pro/Rack mount guitar tuner
TC Electronics FX processor and various Ft pedals
Audix OM7 for background vocals
Future Sonics In Ear Monitors

Bobby Sheehan/Bass:
Modulus Guitars
Taylor acoustic bass 6 string
D'Addario Strings
Mesa Boogie 400 & 400+ Bass amplifiers
Mesa Boogie 4x10" speaker cabinets
Mesa Boogie Power house 1x15" w/4x10" cabinets
Korg DT-1 Pro/Rack mount guitar tuner
Audix OM7 for Background vocals

Brendan Hill/Drums:
Yamaha Maple Custom Drums (Black)
24"x 16" Bass (kick) Drum
14"x 6" Snare Drum
13"x 13" Rack tom
14"x 14" Rack tom
16"x 16" Floor tom
18"x 18" Floor tom
Drum Workshop (DW 5000)
DW 5000 Double Braced Hi Hat stand
DW 5000 Kick pedal
Yamaha Stands/Hardware
Zildjian Cymbals
Remo Drum Heads
Vic Firth Drum Sticks
Future Sonics In Ear monitors




------------------------------------------------------------------------




HORDE 

In the Spring of 1992, John called some of his musical friends to a summit in New York City. Several ideas were shared which ultimately culminated into 2 one-week tours featuring the young new bands from the meeting. These bands were friends and were all building a following through constant touring outside of radio and other conventional record-selling mediums. 


The Tours 



1992 

The first 2-week tours featured Aquarium Rescue Unit, Blues Traveler, Phish, Spin Doctors Widespread Panic. 

1993 

This year the tour marched forward featuring Aquarium Rescue Unit, Allgood, Big Head Todd & The Monsters, Blues Traveler, The Samples and Widespread Panic. The tour played 26 shows in 6 weeks and was joined by The Allman Brothers Band (2 shows), Phish (2 shows) and Melissa Etheridge (1 show). There was also a local band added to the show in each market. The "counter culture concourse", previously nothing more than an emaciated ghetto where thin hippies would sell you what beads they could and tumbleweeds would frighten the coyotes who were scavenging for scraps, this year showcased "alternative" foods, arts, performances, games, crafts and environmental groups, thus becoming a viable entity. 

1994 

This year's lineup featured The Allman Brothers Band, Blues Traveler, Big Head Todd & The Monsters and either Sheryl Crow or The Dave Matthews Band depending on the market. There were 31 shows in 8 weeks and covered most major markets in North America. The 8-hour event had 2 stages of music and a more complete concourse. 

1995 

This tour played 22 dates and featured The Black Crowes, Blues Traveler, Ziggy Marley and the Melody Makers, Morphine, Taj Mahal, Wilco, G-Love and Special Sauce and a total of 29 other bands on what was becoming quite a second stage. The concourse continued its growth and was fast becoming a booming metropolis I highlighted by a life-size Pacific blue whale hand-carved from an old-growth redwood tree. This was the site of the new workshop stage where member of different bands could and would come together and spontaneously jam in an intimate setting. Awareness booths included Greenpeace, Planned Parenthood...There was also on-site glassblowing art. 

1996 

This year the tour will begin July 6th in Minneapolis and run through September 1 wrapping up in West Palm Beach. Headlining this year will be Blues Traveler with Lenny Kravitz, Rusted Root and The Dave Matthews Band and Natalie Merchant will join the tour at different points. Stay tuned for more details. Among the many concourse attractions this year, HORDE is proud to unveil its new Air Force as hot air balloon rides will be a featured attraction. 





How It Came To Be 

No one knew that cold March 15 in 1992 in that small office at Bill Graham Management NYC what the Great American HORDE was going to become. Representatives from Widespread Panic, The Spin Doctors, Col. Bruce Hampton himself and all of Phish met with BT to discuss the problems of being a small to mid-size band in terms of draw and having no outdoor venue of appropriate size to play in that was open- air for the summer. The idea had been going around for years "what if we teamed up and made a festival? could we generate enough of an audience to fill the large open-air sheds?" Sheds that everyone involved had been dreaming of playing. It was John Popper who made the calls and arranged the meeting. For the one thing that all the bands had in common at the time was a very strong relationship with BT who in their quest to play every State, had traveled the farthest in terms of area, it stood to reason that they would make the call and set the meeting. It helped as well to have the management office and Bill Graham Presents and its resources to draw on. David Graham who had watched his father's company develop Lollapalooza was filled with ideas that he shared with John. But what was really required was interest from all the bands and a desire to cooperate. It was John Fishman who, grabbing a jar of Vaseline off Dave Frey's desk declared to the room "let us seal the deal with a sacred smearing". Not much is known about what happened in that room but several desks and a door hinge were destroyed. Everyone emerged lubricated and happy, thinking only of the coming summer. No one knew what lay ahead. When John suggested the name of HORDE, he wanted it to stand for Horizons of Rock Developing East Coast. It seemed to him, especially at the time that all of the bands involved were at the forefront of a new young burgeoning scene of bands in the Eastern U.S. that played live. All musicians involved were all great players, emulating jamming styles of an earlier era while being as fresh and current as anything Seattle had created. But Eric Schenkman rightly and almost prophetically pointed out that it truly was the Horizons of Rock Developing Everywhere. And so began what would take John Popper and David Frey 9 months to sort out. Bands get along much better than agents, managers, venue promoters, concessionaires, State agencies and special interest groups. At the end of the tour, at John's insistence each band received a mystical and specially forged working broadsword. On the massive blade, along with all the logos from each band, (the banners of each army) were inscribed in Latin "Mota Et Voluta". As well as "Modulare Et Vincire" which means "Rock and Roll, Jam and Conquer". At the end of those 8 dates in 1992, when they had finished, Popper and Frey were too exhausted to realize that they had just started, and on it went. 



------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------


[ Map of the Isles | Navigation Room | Crew's Quarters | Treasure Hold | Blue Isle News | 
Blue Lamp Tavern | Barter's Exchange | Village Market | Art of the Isles ] 

[WEBMASTER] 

