I guess the story really begins on a small worm farm in Azzoula, Mississippi (pop. 308) in 1910.  A woman there named Rhea Delacroix gave birth to a one-eyed man named Dowl. Dowl wasn't much a one to talk but he loved his moonshine. Eventually he drowned in a keg of whiskey (but not before getting out to go to the bathroom several times). He was father to three kin, and one boy. This boy, Althusa D. Maxwell Eponisious Delacroix, would later lay the bedrock for what would then become the music that would eventually be recycled and regurgitated until it was reproduced almost identically, accidentally, some three years later, by a pair of unrelated white boys from comfortable suburban backgrounds.

The music is everything for Valium Effort. The songs explain themselves "Lycanthroblues"- why the story is as simple as falling off a wagon, drunk, at 3 AM, and waking up to not know where you are. These are the songs that will define the generation that perhaps doesn't even exist, yet or never, and what's the difference? Listen to the bass line on "Nitrogen Narcosis" and you know the story. Old Blind Erich McGhee, he could barely play one note when old Max found him; now he can play two. Unfortunately on this song, one of the notes happens to be wrong. But is Max angry? Does he scold him? No. He lets him be. He abides. Just like the music.

That's the magic that rewards the listener every time he pulls this LP off the dusty shelf. For this is the music and these are the feelings. And old Max, perhaps taking a lesson from old mom Delacroix, prefers to just let it happen rather than try to step all over the raw genius of it with anything as mundane as "professional gloss". You may feel the same, and if you too can refrain from judging these songs harshly, you'll be rewarded with some of the most dubious pleasures in the history of folk music. Listen to the refrain on "Percosex" as old Max, voice ravaged with time and bourbon sings

"I'm getting hungry and I don't want to look
Not ready for a gamble and I don't want to cook.
Glare down from your perch daddy, Inside you are beamin'
Some died in their boots, some died in their semen."

You can hear the gentle concern in his tonation. In the funeral-dirge bass you can hear Erich's uncertainty as he tries to remember the chord changes; the terror as he tries to hear if he is even in the right key. This is music as more than music, beyond art; it has a name all its own, "Valium Effort". Why Valium? 

Why, do you have any? 

If you do, then take one, pop a top off a beer, grab that dusty whiskey bottle off the shelf, make yourself seat on the floor and let the sounds absorb you. The Valium Effort is here now, and like whiskey, it's so old it never gets stale.

-Dr. Morpheus J. Twilite
