WILLIE THE WEEPER
as performed by DAVE VAN RONK

G#m  E7 D#7

      G#m                     D#7       G#m
Well this is the story bout Willie the Weeper
      G#m                    D#7      G#m
Now Willie the weeper was a chimney sweeper
C#m                              
He had the habit and he had it bad
 G#m                     D#7
let me tell you about a dream he had

G#m     
Dee-dee-dee-dee-dah  Dee-dee-dee-dah
                          D#7         G#m
Bah dah 'm da 'm dah dah      tee-dah-dah

well he went to the hophouse the other night
where he knew the lights were always shining bright
he called to the boy to bring him some hop
He started in smoking like he'd never stop

Dee-dee-dee-dee-dah  Dee-dee-dee-dah
Bah dah 'm da 'm dah dah tee-dah-dah

well after he smoked a dozen pills
he says I found a cure for my aches and ills
he turned on the sign and he went to sleep
dreamed he was a sailor on the ocean deep

Well he played draw poker as he left the land
he won a million dollars on the very first hand
he played and played until the crew went broke
and then he turned around and had another smoke

Well he came to the island of Siam
and rubbed his eyes and said I wonder where I am
he played craps with the king and won a million more
then he had to leave the island because the king got sore

Well he went to Monte Carlo and he played Roulette
he couldn't lose a penny cause he won every bet
well he played and he played until the bank went broke
then he turned around and had another smoke

well then he thought he ought to be sailing homeward
well he chartered a ship and sailed away alone
well the ship hit a rock he hit floor
well the dope wore off and the dream was off

well that was the story about willie the weeper
willie the weeper was a 
someday a pill too many he'll take
and dreaming that he's dead he will forget to wake




Willie the Weeper

Did you ever hear the story of Willie the Weeper?
He had a job as a chimney sweeper,
He had the habit, and he had it bad.
Listen, while I tell you 'bout the dream had.

cho.

Teet tee dee dee   x2
Toot too do do do  x2
Yah da da de da    x2
Yah yah yah        x2

He went to a hop-house the other night
Where the lights were always shining bright.
Guess he smoked a dozen pills or more;
When he woke, 'twas on a foreign shore.

The Queen of Sheba was the first he met,
She called him her darlin' and her lovin' pet.
She gave him a fancy automobile
With a diamond headlight and a golden wheel.

He landed with a splash, in the river Nile
A'ridin' a sea-goin' crocodile.
He winked at Cleopatra, she said "Aint he a sight!
How about a date for next Saturday night?"

He went to Monte Carlo, where he played roulette
He couldn't lose a penny, and he won every bet.
He played and he played 'till the bank went broke
Then he turned around, and took another smoke.

He went off to Turkey, by special request,
He stayed 7 years, as the sultan's guest
But when he got in with that harem crew
What was a poor fellah like Willie to do?

He had a million cattle  and a million sheep.
He had a million vessels on the ocean deep.
He had a million dollars, all in nickles and dimes...
Well he knew it 'cause he'd counted  them a million times.

He landed in New York, one evening late
He asked his sugar to make a late date.
He started to kiss her, then he made her pout
When...bing,bang,bing...the dope gave out.

Now this is the story of Willie the Weeper
He's got a job as a chimney sweeper.
Some day a pill too many he'll take
And dreaming he's dead, he'll forget to wake.





WILLIE THE WEEPER

He rolled and he smoked about a million pills
He figured it'd cure all his aches and ills.
It wasn't long until he fell asleep
And dreamed he was sailing on the ocean deep.

He played draw poker as he left the land
And won a million dollars on the very first hand.
He played and he played, until the crew went broke...
Then, he turned around and took another smoke.

He played 'till he came to the land of Siam
He rubbed his eyes and said "I wonder where I am"
Played craps with the King, and won a million more,
Then left for Monte Carlo when the King got sore.
He played gin rummy with the Shah of Iran
He busted the Shah with the very first han'
And when he looked around, and everybody was broke
He bought a million dollars worth of hop to smoke.

Down in Honolulu, Willie fell in a trance
Watching the beauties do a hula dance.
His sweety got in jail, and Willie sure did shout
When he got the news that she had wriggled out.

He bought an ocean liner, all his own,
He loaded it with money, and he started to roam.
He said he'd let it go until it wanted to stop
While  he counts his money and he smokes his hop.
Then he went to Paris to buy all the wine
For a whole carload he paid a measly dime.
He bought a ruby bush and a diamond tree
And a whole lot of friends to keep him company.

One day while Willie took a quiet smoke
The ship struck a rock and Willie awoke
His money was gone and his dream was oer
Now he's sweeping chimneys, like he was before.
Around a  lay-out table, a pair of hop-fiends lay
Listen, and I'll tell you what they had to say...
Tales of money they were goin' to make...
And the faro-banks they were goin' to break.
Oh Willie was the biggest  dreamer of them all..
Dreamin' that the world was at his beck and call.
When he had smoked a dozen pills or more
He dreamed he was living on a foreign shore.

Hootenanny Tonight  (with minor scansion-producing alterations by E.L)
@drugs
filename[ WILLWEP2
EL
===DOCUMENT BOUNDARY===
