Red Peters with The New Christy Hamsters

HOLY SHIT, IT'S CHRISTMAS!
(Grenga Stevens Johnson Lawry)




SFX- Jingling bells, intro music bed, etc.

(off in the distance)   "Ho, ho, ho....."

Hamster #1- "Did you hear that?"

Hamster #2- "Hey everybody, Santa's here!"

Hamster #3- "Aw, there ain't no Santa Claus."

Hamster #2- "There is, too!"

SFX- knock on door

Hamsters  - "He's here!!!"

SFX- door bursts open

Red- "Ho, ho, ho... Merry Christmas boys!"

Hamster #1- "Aw, shit, it's Red Peters..."

Hamsters  - "Awww..." (grumbling in unison)

Red- "Come on you swinging hamsters, get over here.
      We're gonna sing us a happy Christmas song."

Hamster #1- "Oh no, not another corny, stupid song."

Hamster #2- "Yeah, no way Red."

Hamsters  - "Yeah, yeah..."                                                              

Red- "Get over here and sing or I'll ring your little necks!"

Hamsters  - "OK!, OK!...jeesh!"


SUNG
Grab your nuts hamsters, gather round with me
forget about out all that teasin'
we're breakin' out the holly and aluminum tree
cuz it's that jolly season
I know you been naughty, but have you been nice
that's only Santa's business
he's makin' his list and he's checkin' it twice
                  Holy Shit, It's Christmas! (HAMSTERS)

                

               Santa comes just once a year
HAMSTERS       just like you Red, that's what we hear
               he's got a soft spot for reindeer
               especially Rudolph's derriere

knock it off fellas it's a holiday
go on give santa a big kiss
you can play hide the hamster on a one horse sleigh
                  Holy Shit, It's Christmas! (HAMSTERS)


(instrumental)


Red- "Hey, what happened to my lyric sheet? Anyone seen my lyric sheet?"

Hamster #1- "Heck, we don't need no lyric sheets, Red.
             We know our parts by heart. Right fellas?" (giggles)

Hamster #2- "Yeah, I know my part, Godfried." (giggles)

Hamster #3- "Yah, me too!" (giggles)

Red- "Well that's great guys, I love Christmas songs."


SUNG
Godfried-    Santa tried reaching up the neighbors blouse 
             after drinking all the eggnog
Bruce-       camped out in the bathroom for an hour or two
             squashing off a yule log                                   
Raliegh-     he wandered in his undies all over the house
             but we minded our own business
Hamsters-    til we caught him stuffing hamsters up a gift wrap tube
                                           
All-         Holy Shit, It's Christmas!
       
         

(Red)          Santa comes just once a year
               up the chimney he'll disappear
   
(hamsters)     keep on the look out for Mr. Gere
               hamster deliveries in the rear


Red- (grabbing the lyric sheet, speaking...)   "Gimme those lyrics!!!"


roastnuts chestin' on an open fire 
santas tongue stuck to the doorknob
his balls got fondled by a carolin' choir
while the parson gave him a hand... what?
the sleigh came down and took him away 
that whole damn crowd was dismissed
it was time to be jolly, a time to be gay
                Holy Shit, It's Christmas! (HAMSTERS)
                Holy Shit, It's Christmas!       "
                Holy Shit, It's Christmas!       "      
                        (end)