Author: Yes
# (1969) aNDERSON, bANKS, bRUFORD, kAYE, sQUIRE

Looking Around
(Anderson/Squire)

Looking around me,
There's not so much in life I miss.
Things that I can't see,
I'll touch and I'll feel then I'll kiss.
Then I saw you standing there
With a smile I couldn't share,
Just looking around ev'rywhere.

All the things I've wanted to do
Take so much time to get around to you.
Just reach out and catch and hold on,
Leaving trails of dust and lust,
Never even ly'ng or try'ng, keep on moving, never dying.

Tunes that I can't hear
Would take me for a while my smile.
Fares that are too dear,
I'd rather walk out another mile.
Then I heard a tune so right,
It was in the dark of night,
Just list'ning around ev'rywhere.

All the things I've wanted to do
Take so much time to get around to you.
Just reach out and catch and hold on,
Leaving trails of dust and lust,
Never even ly'ng or try'ng, keep on moving, never dying.

Smiles that I don't see,
I'll make them up as I go on.
Laughs that just can't be,
I'll make and laugh at ev'ry one.
Then I saw you in your place
With a laugh upon your face,
Just looking around ev'rywhere.

All the things I've wanted to do
Take so much time to get around to you.
Just reach out and catch and hold on,
Leaving trails of dust and lust,
Never even ly'ng or try'ng, keep on moving, never dying.

Looking around with my feet on the ground
Full of words and of sound, bringing smiles all around.

Satisfy me with your words that can be,
Full of sound and I'll see I'm just looking around.

Beyond And Before
(Squire/Bailey)

Sparkling trees of silver foam cast shadows in winter home,
Swaying branches breaking sound, lonely forest trembling ground.
Masquerading leaves of blue run circles round the morning dew,
Patterns understood by you, reaching out beyond and before.
Time, like gold dust, brings mind down to hidden levels underground,
Say a few words to the wind, that's all that's left of winter's friend.

Reaching the snow in the days of the cold, casting a spell out of ice.
Now that you're gone,
The summer's too long and it seems like the end of my life
Beyond and before.
Time, like gold dust, brings mind down.

Sweetness
(Anderson/Squire/Bailey)

She brings the sunshine to a rainy afternoon;
She puts the sweetness in, stirs it with a spoon.
She watches for my moods, never brings me down;
She puts the sweetness in, all around.
She knows just what to say to make me feel so good inside.
And when I'm all alone I feel I don't want to hide, hide, hide.

Today she brought me in, told me where she'd been;
She put my mind at rest, put the sweetness in.
I'll ask her for some time to go and look around;
She puts the sweetness in with a sound.
She knows just what to say to make a sunny day.
And when I'm all alone I really don't feel that way.
Tell me, how would you feel with no world of your own and nobody to
  hold?
I just can't see the way; I'm so glad it's today and you're here, you're here.

She brings the sunshine to a rainy afternoon;
She puts the sweetness in, stirs it with a spoon.
She watches for my moods, never brings me down;
She puts the sweetness in, all around.
She knows just what to say to make me feel so good inside.
And when I'm all alone I really don't feel that way.

Oh how I need her so,
I know she'll never go. Doo doo doo doot n doo.
She'll never leave me, believe me, no. Doo doo doo doot n doo.
She'll never go, no no no no no no no no no no no no.

Harold Land
(Anderson/Squire/Bruford)

Harold Land with a wave of his hand said goodbye to all that.
He paid his bills and stopped the milk, then put on his hat.
He tried to say his last farewells as quickly as he could,
Promising that he would return, but doubted that he would,
Doubted that he would, doubted.

Now he's marching soldiers in the rain as on to war they rode.
A long thin line of human mind, damnation as their load.
In the mud in coldness dark, he'd shiver out his fear,
What disappointing sights he'd seen instead of ones so dear,
Instead of ones so dear, so dear.

Going home,                        He's going home to the land he loved so well.
Going home,                                 He fought for two years, never fell.
Going home,                                                     He's going home,
Going home.                                                     He's going home.

Harold Land with a wave of his hand stood sadly on the stage,
Clutching red ribbons from a badge, but he didn't look his age.
Only two years had passed between his leaving home and back;
He had lost his love and youth while leading the attack, leading the attack.

In conversation it could be said,
Well after war your heart is dead.
Well it's not hard to understand,
There is no heart in Harold Land.

Yesterday And Today
(Anderson)

Why is there you when there are few people around making me feel good?
Why is there me when air is free, some I can see better than I should?
There's only us simply because thinking of us makes us both happy.
I think of you ev'ry way, yesterday and today.
I think of things that we do, all the way, ev'ry day.

Stand in the sea, sing songs for me, sing happily, making me feel good.
Watching your eyes, feeling your sighs, saying goodbyes better than I could.
There's only us simply because thinking of us makes us both happy.
I think of you ev'ry way, yesterday and today.
I think of nothing but you, things we do, things we do.
