YOUR DAUGHTER, PLEASE

       D                   C              G                F
Well I know my teeth ain't pearly and my hair is far from curly 
      D            C            G      F  
but I got a little girly on the run. 
   D                   C       G                    F           
We share our nights of loving twenty minutes in the oven 
      D                 C                    G     F
while endurance of the pleasure is under the gun. 
      D                   C          G                F               E
They know their butter's breaded realize their bed is headed for some fun- nels

F#
Back in town, gonna hang for a spell 
       A                     
gonna find the preacher's daughter and bring her down to hell.
F#
Gonna change her life with my sordid escapades
    A
and grind her like a gator in the everglades
     F#
she can't get enough screaming please no wait
C                      A7
on to chapter two as I pull down the shades

Toadstool dirty pigeons of yonder and yore
circumscribe machismo bunk folklore. 
He date shtupps a better jewess than ever before 
pushing prejudice and latent sodomy galore 
he'll beat a thief and buy a rape on the senate floor. 
He might eat a little negro plant the evil and let the seed grow
but we're fully loaded from the hip - evermore.

Next town I hit I slice like a knife 
making intimate friends with the bartender's wife 
but he got in the way would not set her free 
so as his blood flowed out of him his ten high flowed into me. 
She cried "My life is over you're all I got." 
I snickered as I slipped away with his money booze and pot.

You might clique and fraternize it 
shave your head and keep fake smiles lit. 
All cellulited thighs fit under my brawn. 
My snicker's sweet potatoes eyes get 
mighty thirsty hungry overactive 
while a virginated prawn is my putty by dawn 
I may seem a bit unrealistic, undersensitive antijock ballistic 
but I'll stomp on self-castrated infected peons

In the next town however my life made a change 
I met a girl straight from heaven she made me feel so strange.
She was the dealer's girl and she made my heart melt.
The dealer saw my eyes and knew how I felt.
Soon guns lit up the night til the sky shone bright like day 
now I lie in the hospital and sadly slip away

